===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/conditions/diabetes-and-constipation.html",
  "title": "Constipation - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:08:42.369821",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Constipation - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 593,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Constipation - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Constipation affects most people from time to time and can vary from being infrequent to being a chronic, long term condition. A few different conditions and factors related to diabetes may increase the likelihood of experiencing constipation. Symptoms Signs of constipation include passing stools infrequently, and passing hard stools that can involve straining. The NHS notes that each person will tend to have slightly different bowel habits. Constipation can cause problems if it leads to: Bloating Stomach pains Discomfort or difficulty in passing stools Causes There are a number of possible causes of constipation. A common cause is a change in diet, particularly related to a reduction in intake of insoluble fibre. Other causes may include: Lack of hydration Autonomic neuropathy Coeliac disease Irritable bowel syndrome Colorectal cancer Certain medications Medications that may result in constipation include antidepressants, water tablets and calcium or iron supplements. It is common for women in the early stages of pregnancy to experience constipation Treating constipation with diet Constipation can be eased through dietary changes. The NHS notes that many people in the UK don’t eat enough fibre. The recommendation is to eat between 18g and 30g of fibre a day. Insoluble fibre, as found in whole grains , vegetables and fruit, is particularly recommended for helping to move food through the gut. The NHS recommends adding a source of wheat bran to you diet to help make stools easier to pass. This is not recommended, however, for people with coeliac disease or a gluten allergy or intolerance. Keeping well hydrated will help to keep stools softer. Treating constipation with medication Taking laxatives may help in easing constipation. Different types of laxatives are available including bulk-forming laxatives, which help you to retain water in your stools, osmotic laxatives, which increase the amount fluid in the bowel and stimulant laxatives, which stimulate movement of the bowel. Constipation and diabetes There are a few reasons linked with diabetes that may increase the likelihood of constipation. People following a diet that restricts wheat products may experience constipation. This may be alleviated by increasing the amount of vegetables you eat and keeping hydrated. If autonomic neuropathy affects the nerves in the bowel this can cause constipatio, diarrhoea or intermittent periods of each. Speak to you GP or diabetes specialist if neuropathy is causing significant difficulties. Higher than normal blood glucose levels can decrease hydration which can therefore decrease the availability of water in the bowel if insufficient fluid is replaced. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.