===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/nhs/diabetes-health-checks.html",
  "title": "Annual diabetes checks - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:07:48.428141",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Annual diabetes checks - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 976,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Annual diabetes checks - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail To ensure we stay healthy, as people with diabetes, we should undergo a number of important health checks each year. Some of the checks are ones which we should receive at least once each year and others are dependent on specific circumstances. Essential diabetes health checks The following health checks are ones which all people with diabetes should receive once a year. The one exception to this rule is children under 12 years old. Blood glucose control check – HbA1c test This may be carried out either via a blood sample taken from your arm, or if it is the only blood check, via a finger prick test. HbA1c test Blood lipid check – cholesterol test This test requires a blood sample from your arm. Cholesterol screening Blood samples will usually require you to arrange for the blood test to be taken at least a couple of weeks before your annual diabetic care review. Check with your health team if you need more information about the process. Kidney function check Two different tests are carried out to check for kidney problems. For the first check, a urine sample is needed. Ideally you should bring your urine sample with you to your diabetic care review. The urine test looks for the presence of protein in the urine. No protein in the urine is a good sign. The second check is done via a blood sample which checks the glomerular filtration rate of the kidneys; in other words, how well the kidneys are functioning. Kidney screening Blood pressure check Your blood pressure will usually be measured at your clinic or diabetic care review. The test is not complicated but you will need to be in a rested state whilst your blood pressure is being checked to prevent the reading being higher than it should be. People’s blood pressure can rise in a short space of time and the doctor or nurse may need to repeat the test if a high reading is recorded. Blood pressure screening Retinopathy screening Each year you should be offered a retinopathy screening check. The check involves having a photograph taken of your retina at the back of your eye. The retinopathy check may be carried out at a hospital or at an opticians. Your doctor or local retinopathy service should inform you of where you can have your retinopathy test performed. Check with your health team whether you need to book yourself in for a test or whether the booking will be done on your behalf. Diabetic retinopathy screening Foot examinations As with all of the above, feet checks should be performed at least once a year. At the foot check, the doctor or nurse will look for signs of damage to the skin (such as cuts, burns, blisters or ulcers), will check your circulation and test the level of feeling in your feet for any signs of neuropathy (nerve damage) Weight checks You should have your weight checked at each diabetic care review or clinic, even if you’re a healthy weight. If you are overweight, you should have your waist measured as well. Diabetes and BMI Additional diabetes health checks In addition to the essential health checks above, a number of additional health checks should be performed where relevant. An individual diabetes care plan A diabetes care plan should be to set up targets that are appropriate for you along with listing any personal needs to help you manage your diabetes and health. Read more about a diabetes care plan Diabetes education People with diabetes should be offered the opportunity to join a diabetes education course. Diabetes education courses Paediatric care Children should receive specialist paediatric care and receive adequate support when they move into adult care. Paediatric to adult transitional care Pregnancy care If you are planning on having a baby, it is important that you receive specialist care to help you keep tight control of your diabetes through your pregnancy. Diabetes and pregnancy Support to quit smoking Because the combination of smoking and diabetes significantly raises the chance of complications such as heart disease and stroke, people with diabetes who are looking to quit smoking should receive advice and support to help. Diabetes and smoking Psychological support People with diabetes have a higher chance of needing psychological support and this should be provided by your health team where needed. Diabetes and depression Access to medical specialists People with diabetes should be given access to a range of specialists, such as dietitians and podiatrists, as and when needed to help manage diabetes and any related conditions or complications. Diabetes healthcare team Care in hospital People with diabetes admitted to hospital should expect high quality care and should have appropriate access to specialists. Read more about diabetes care in hospital What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.