===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/emotions/",
  "title": "Mental health overview - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:08:06.517285",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Mental health overview - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 598,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Mental health overview - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Amar Singh Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail For anyone with diabetes, experiencing negative emotions such as anger, frustration, hopelessness, fear, guilt and shame is very common. According to NICE when a person is first diagnosed with diabetes, they will often go through similar psychological stages as that of bereavement: Disbelief Denial Anger Depression Higher HbA1c levels have been found to be associated with physical symptoms including hyperglycemic score, mood including levels of displeasure, depression, tension and fatigue and with worse general well-being. We look at how emotions can affect your life and diabetes management: Diabetes and Emotions Guides: Diabetes and Anger Diabetes and Anxiety Diabetes and Guilt Diabetes and Depression Diabetes Burnout Tiredness and Diabetes Diabetes and Mindfulness The relative association varied between 1.02 and 1.36 for each percentage difference in HbA1c. The relation between HbA1c and some mood states have been found to be modified by neuroticism a patient who is less inclined to complain was associated with worse glyceamic control. [45] Mindfulness training has been shown to address depression, stress, anxiety, chronic pain all of which have been implemented with better glycaemia control, diabetes management and greater reported quality of life: Mindfulness and hypoglycemia Mindfulness’ effect on blood gluose levels and blood pressure Mindfulness and sleep Mindfulness and back pain More likely to suffer from depression According to the NHS people with diabetes are twice as likely to suffer with depression. Evidence presented by the National Diabetes Support Team indicate that ‘recovery from depression is associated with reductions in HbA1c levels of between 0.5% and 1% suggesting that treating depression can not only improve quality of life but could also significantly reduce the risk of complications.’ Some stressors may emerge after many weeks, months or years following diagnosis. Alternatively, there may be difficulties that arise upon initial diabetes diagnosis and continue without being resolved. These may include: Diabetes and Emotions Guides: Your Diagnosis Comfort Eating and Overeating Healthcare Professionals Compulsive Behaviour Low Moods and Depression Increase Your Motivation Sex, Diabetes and Relationships Needle Phobia Dealing with Denial Long Term Complications Worry and Anxiety Tackling Lifestyle Changes A NHS Confederation briefing paper has highlighted the importance of integrating the treatment of physical and mental healthcare and acknowledges the increased prevalence of mental health needs amongst people with physical health conditions. The paper also accepts that treatment of the mental health needs has a positive impact on physical wellbeing (NHS Confederation). This section features Psychology based articles written by Dr Jen Nash , a Clinical Psychologist and Charlotte Summers, a Mindfulness-based diabetes researcher. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.