===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-medication/forxiga-dapagliflozin.html",
  "title": "Forxiga (Dapagliflozin) - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "medication",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:12:01.924138",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Forxiga (Dapagliflozin) - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 912,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Forxiga (Dapagliflozin) - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Medications ACTOS Amaryl Avandia Bydureon Byetta Corticosteroids Eylea Forxiga Galvus Glucobay Glucagon injection kits Insulin Invokana Januvia Jardiance Lantus Lucentis Lyxumia Metformin Glucophage Metformin and cancer Metformin and other diabetes medication Metformin and weight loss Metformin brands Metformin during pregnancy Metformin factsheet Metformin FAQs Metformin side effects Mounjaro Onglyza Prandin Statins Semaglutide Symlin Tresiba Trulicity Victoza Classes of drugs Alpha glucosidase inhibitor Amylin analogues Biguanides DPP-4 inhibitors (gliptins) Incretin mimetics (GLP-1 analogues) Oral hypoglycemics Prandial glucose regulators (glinides) SGLT2 inhibitors Sulphonylureas Thiazolidinediones (glitazones) Fake diabetes cures Forgetting an insulin injection Forgetting to take tablets Forxiga is a tablet medication which helps to reduce blood glucose levels by helping the kidneys to remove glucose from the blood and excrete it within urine. The drug helps to support weight loss but may raise the risk of genital thrush and urinary tract infections. Because Forxiga is a relatively new medication, the long term effects of the drug, over several years, are as yet unknown. About Forxiga Trade name: Forxiga Generic name: Dapagliflozin Drug class: SGLT2 inhibitors Manufacturer: AstraZeneca How Forxiga helps in diabetes Dapagliflozin helps lower blood glucose levels by helping the body to filter more excess glucose out of the blood. As well as being effective in lowering blood glucose levels, by passing glucose out of the body, the accompanying calories in the excreted glucose is also passed out. It is important, however, to ensure you maintain a healthy diet and take regular physical exercise in addition to taking Forxiga to keep your heart and the rest of your body healthy. Mechanism of action Dapagliflozin is in a class of drug called SGLT2 inhibitors These drugs work by targeting and helping to stop sodium-glucose transport proteins from allowing glucose that has been filtered out of the blood by the kidneys to be reabsorbed back into the blood. The SGLT2 proteins are responsible for 90% of the glucose that is reabsorbed into the blood. By inhibiting the SGLT2 proteins, Forxiga allows a significant amount of glucose in the blood to be removed by the kidneys and excreted in the urine. Who is Forxiga suitable for? Forxiga is used to treat: Type 2 diabetes in adults and children aged 10 years and older, if type 2 diabetes cannot be controlled with diet and exercise. Forxiga can be used on its own or together with other medicines to treat diabetes. It is important to continue to follow the advice on diet and exercise given to you by your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. Heart failure in adults (aged 18 years and older) when the heart does not pump blood as well as it should. Chronic kidney disease in adults with reduced kidney function. Who should not take dapagliflozin? Dapagliflozin is not suitable for people who: Have type 1 diabetes Are pregnant or breastfeeding Type 2 diabetes with moderate to severe kidney disease Are galactose intolerant Have low salt levels in their body How and when to take Forxiga Forxiga is taken in tablet form at doses of 10mg. Take with water once a day either with or without food. Try to take Forxiga at around the same time each day and do not take more than one dose within a 12 hour period. If you miss a dose and your next dose is within 12 hours, wait until the next dose to resume the treatment. Storage Dapagliflozin tablets should always be kept in the original container and stored at room temperature. You must also make sure the medicine is kept out of the sight and reach of children. Side effects Side effects of Forxiga may include: Hypoglycemia – if taken with sulphonylureas or insulin Thrush Urinary tract infections Increased need to visit the toilet ( polyuria ) Changes in levels of blood fats Lowering of blood pressure Nightmares Seizures Shakiness Slurred speech Swelling of the face, fingers, or lower legs Thick, white vaginal discharge with mild or no odor Trouble breathing Unusual tiredness or weakness Vomiting Weight gain Please note the list above is not exhaustive. Refer to the patient information leaflet in the medication for a full list of side effects. What to do if you take an overdose If you take an overdose of Forxiga, contact your health team immediately for advice. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Medication Retatrutide is an new drug that has shown promise in the treatment… 4 minute read