===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-medication/diabetes-and-januvia.html",
  "title": "Januvia (Sitagliptin) - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "medication",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:12:29.963296",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Januvia (Sitagliptin) - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 517,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Januvia (Sitagliptin) - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Medications ACTOS Amaryl Avandia Bydureon Byetta Corticosteroids Eylea Forxiga Galvus Glucobay Glucagon injection kits Insulin Invokana Januvia Jardiance Lantus Lucentis Lyxumia Metformin Glucophage Metformin and cancer Metformin and other diabetes medication Metformin and weight loss Metformin brands Metformin during pregnancy Metformin factsheet Metformin FAQs Metformin side effects Mounjaro Onglyza Prandin Statins Semaglutide Symlin Tresiba Trulicity Victoza Classes of drugs Alpha glucosidase inhibitor Amylin analogues Biguanides DPP-4 inhibitors (gliptins) Incretin mimetics (GLP-1 analogues) Oral hypoglycemics Prandial glucose regulators (glinides) SGLT2 inhibitors Sulphonylureas Thiazolidinediones (glitazones) Fake diabetes cures Forgetting an insulin injection Forgetting to take tablets Januvia (Sitagliptin) is an oral gliptin drug used to lower blood glucose levels amongst people with type 2 diabetes Sitagliptin is the first of a class of drugs to be approved that mimics the actions of the dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) enzyme. How does Januvia work? Sitagliptin works by inhibiting the DPP-4 enzyme that destroys GLP and GIP hormones, allowing both to function more effectively. Both glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) are released by the intestine and affect blood glucose levels. When more of these hormones are released blood sugar levels are reduced. Who is Januvia prescribed to? Sitagliptin is prescribed to people with type 2 diabetes, and is usually taken alongside a healthy diet and regular, appropriate exercise to help control diabetes. Furthermore, Sitagliptin is often prescribed alongside other diabetes drugs such as (trade name first, generic name in brackets): Avandia (Rosiglitazone) Metformin (Metformin Hydrochloride) Actos (Pioglitazone) What side effects are associated with Januvia? Common side effects relating to sitagliptin include: Infections of the upper respiratory tract Headaches More infrequently, Sitagliptin is associated with abdominal pain, nausea and diarrhoea. I want to know more about Sitaglipti, what should I do? If your question is urgent, you should contact your doctor or diabetes healthcare professional immediately. Please use the Diabetes forum to get an independent perspective from the community. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Medication Retatrutide is an new drug that has shown promise in the treatment… 4 minute read