===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-medication/diabetes-and-byetta.html",
  "title": "Byetta (Exenatide) - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "medication",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:11:56.647621",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Byetta (Exenatide) - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 611,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Byetta (Exenatide) - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Medications ACTOS Amaryl Avandia Bydureon Byetta Corticosteroids Eylea Forxiga Galvus Glucobay Glucagon injection kits Insulin Invokana Januvia Jardiance Lantus Lucentis Lyxumia Metformin Glucophage Metformin and cancer Metformin and other diabetes medication Metformin and weight loss Metformin brands Metformin during pregnancy Metformin factsheet Metformin FAQs Metformin side effects Mounjaro Onglyza Prandin Statins Semaglutide Symlin Tresiba Trulicity Victoza Classes of drugs Alpha glucosidase inhibitor Amylin analogues Biguanides DPP-4 inhibitors (gliptins) Incretin mimetics (GLP-1 analogues) Oral hypoglycemics Prandial glucose regulators (glinides) SGLT2 inhibitors Sulphonylureas Thiazolidinediones (glitazones) Fake diabetes cures Forgetting an insulin injection Forgetting to take tablets Byetta (generic name Exenatide) is used to treat people with type 2 diabetes Byetta is an injectable drug that helps to lower blood sugar levels in a way that does not promote weight gain. Whilst Byetta is injected, it is not insulin , but is a drug in the class of diabetic drugs called incretin mimetics Byetta was the first incretin mimetic drug to be approved for treating type 2 diabetes. About Byetta Trade name: Byetta Generic name: Exenatide Drug class: GLP-1 receptor agonist (incretin mimetics) Manufacturer: AstraZeneca How does Byetta work? Byetta works by increasing the secretion of insulin from the pancreas, reducing the action of glucagon (the hormone which raises blood sugar levels) and slowing the absorption of glucose from the gut. Together, these actions lower blood sugar levels and serve to reduce appetite. Byetta, as do the other incretin mimetic drugs, have an advantage over a number of other diabetes drugs in that it helps people achieve weight loss. Who is Byetta (exenatide) prescribed to? Exenatide is typically prescribed with other drugs, and is used to reduce blood glucose levels amongst patients with type 2 diabetes who cannot achieve stable blood glucose by taking metformin , or metformin in combination with other drugs. Exenatide is not prescribed on the NHS to patients with type 1 diabetes How to take Byetta (exenatide)? Byetta is taken by subcutaneous injection twice per day, usually an hour before breakfast and dinner. Doses are typically injected into the thigh, abdomen or upper arm. What are the side effects of Byetta (Exenatide)? Byetta side effects include: Nausea Hypoglycaemia Vomiting Diarrhoea Headache Nervousness and Stomach pain Exenatide can also lead to lower appetite, acid reflux and sweating. Is Exenatide naturally occurring? Exenatide is a man-made hormone that mimics the action of the naturally occurring hormone GLP-1. Patients treated with Exenatide have been proven to achieve lower blood glucose levels. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Medication Retatrutide is an new drug that has shown promise in the treatment… 4 minute read