===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-medication/sulphonylureas.html",
  "title": "Sulphonylureas - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "medication",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:12:37.101118",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Sulphonylureas - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 658,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Sulphonylureas - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Medications ACTOS Amaryl Avandia Bydureon Byetta Corticosteroids Eylea Forxiga Galvus Glucobay Glucagon injection kits Insulin Invokana Januvia Jardiance Lantus Lucentis Lyxumia Metformin Glucophage Metformin and cancer Metformin and other diabetes medication Metformin and weight loss Metformin brands Metformin during pregnancy Metformin factsheet Metformin FAQs Metformin side effects Mounjaro Onglyza Prandin Statins Semaglutide Symlin Tresiba Trulicity Victoza Classes of drugs Alpha glucosidase inhibitor Amylin analogues Biguanides DPP-4 inhibitors (gliptins) Incretin mimetics (GLP-1 analogues) Oral hypoglycemics Prandial glucose regulators (glinides) SGLT2 inhibitors Sulphonylureas Thiazolidinediones (glitazones) Fake diabetes cures Forgetting an insulin injection Forgetting to take tablets Sulphonylureas are a class of oral (tablet) medications that control blood sugar levels in patients with type 2 diabetes by stimulating the production of insulin in the pancreas and increasing the effectiveness of insulin in the body They are generally taken once or twice a day, with or shortly before a meal, and can be taken on their own or prescribed for use alongside other diabetes drugs such as metformin Drugs in this class The following drugs are all in the sulphonylureas class (trade name first, generic name in brackets): Amaryl (Glimepiride) Daonil (Gilbenclamide) Diamicron (Gilclazide) Diamicron MR (Gilclazide) Glibenese (Glipizide) Minodiab (Glipizide) Tolbutamide (Tolbutamide) How do sulphonylureas work? Sulphonylureas are insulin secretagogues, which means they work by causing the body to secrete insulin. Another class of diabetes drugs which works in this way is the prandial glucose regulators class. Sulphonylureas bind to a channel of proteins in the pancreas (ATP-sensitive potassium channel). This triggers a sequence of events within the cells that leads to an increase in the amount of insulin that is produced by pancreatic beta cells Who are sulphonylureas suitable for? Sulphonylureas are suitable for people with type 2 diabetes with blood glucose levels that are higher than the recommended levels (an HbA1c above 6.5%) usually once metformin has been prescribed. Sulphonylureas are not appropriate for people with significantly diminished ability to produce insulin , such as those with type 1 diabetes or that have had a pancreatectomy. Benefits The primary benefit of sulphonylureas is their effect on increasing insulin secretion and therefore helping to reduce blood glucose levels. Side effects Sulphonylureas are not recommended for people who are overweight or obese, as their mode of action (increase in insulin production and secretion) means that weight gain can be a relatively common side effect. Their effect on insulin levels also means users are at increased risk of hypoglycaemia (low blood sugar), although this risk is reduced with newer sulphonylureas such as glimepiride. In addition, some users may suffer an allergic reaction during the first six weeks to eight weeks of treatment, resulting in itchy red skin/skin rashes. If this happens, you might need to switch to another anti-diabetes drug. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Medication Retatrutide is an new drug that has shown promise in the treatment… 4 minute read