===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-and-ketones.html",
  "title": "Ketones - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "blood_glucose",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:01:25.991945",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Ketones - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 851,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Ketones - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail The presence of high levels of ketones in the bloodstream is a common complication of diabetes, which if left untreated can lead to ketoacidosis . Ketones build up when there is insufficient insulin to help fuel the body’s cells. High levels of ketones are therefore more common in people with type 1 diabetes or people with advanced type 2 diabetes. If you are suffering from high levels of ketones and seeking medical advice, contact your GP or diabetes healthcare team as soon as possible. What are ketones? Ketones are an acid remaining when the body burns its own fat. When the body has insufficient insulin, it cannot get glucose from the blood into the body’s cells to use as energy and will instead begin to burn fat. The liver converts fatty acids into ketones which are then released into the bloodstream for use as energy. It is normal to have a low level of ketones as ketones will be produced whenever body fat is burned. In people that are insulin dependent , such as people with type 1 diabetes, however, high levels of ketones in the blood can result from taking too little insulin and this can lead to a particularly dangerous condition known as ketoacidosis How do I test for ketones? Ketone testing can be carried out at home. The most accurate way of testing for ketones is to use a blood glucose meter which can test for ketones as well as blood glucose levels. You can also test urine for ketone levels, however, the testing of urine means that the level you get is representative of your ketone levels up to a few hours ago. Read about testing for ketones and how to interpret the results Who needs to be aware of ketones? The following people with diabetes should be aware of ketones and the symptoms of ketoacidosis: Anyone dependent on insulin – such as all people with type 1 diabetes People with type 2 diabetes that are taking SGLT2 inhibitors (such as Forxiga, Invokana and Jardiance) It is essential to know what the symptoms are, and when you should test for ketones. Finding high levels of ketones present in your urine is a sign that the management of your diabetes needs adjusting. Ketone testing will be important within pregnancy for anyone with diabetes on insulin. Pregnant women with type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes that is not treated with insulin should contact their health team if experiencing the symptoms of ketoacidosis. What are the symptoms of ketoacidosis? Ketones and weight loss As noted above, ketones are produced when the body burns fat. Therefore people that are losing a significant amount of weight may experience higher than normal ketone levels. Ketone testing has also become used by people with type 2 diabetes on ketogenic diets to assess whether they are burning fat effectively. Use of ketone testing in this way is not recommended by the NHS and so ketone testing strips prescribed by doctors are not to be used for this purpose. Ketogenic diets are not usually recommended for people with insulin dependent diabetes as aiming for higher ketone levels could present a higher risk of ketoacidosis occurring. When should I test for ketones, and how will this affect the management of my diabetes? The following information is of relevance to people who need to take insulin. Blood glucose levels rise above 17 mmol/L Blood glucose levels are consistenly above 13 mmol/L If blood glucose levels rise in response to illness If you notice symptoms of ketoacidosis such as vomiting or suffering from diarrhoea If you record high levels of ketones, contact your health team immediately for advice on how best to manage your diabetes. I think I might have diabetic ketoacidosis, how would I know? If you are suffering from diabetic ketoacidosis the early signs are likely to include: Stomach pains Nausea and/or vomiting Breathlessness Breath that smells fruity In this instance, call your doctor as soon as possible as ketoacidosis is an extremely severe condition. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.