===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes_care/testing-for-ketones.html",
  "title": "Ketone testing - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "blood_glucose",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:01:29.474525",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Ketone testing - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 984,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Ketone testing - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 10 November 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Ketone testing is a key part of type 1 diabetes management as it helps to prevent a dangerous short term complication, ketoacidosis , from occurring. If you have type 1 diabetes, it is recommended that you have ketone testing supplies on your prescription. Ketone testing may also be useful in people with other types of diabetes that are dependent upon insulin. Why test for ketones? Ketones are produced by the body as an alternative source of energy to sugar. The body produces ketones by breaking down fats, this process is known as ketosis Ketones may be produced as part of weight loss, however, it’s important for people with diabetes on insulin to note that ketones can be produced when the body has insufficient insulin. When the body has too little insulin, it means that cells of the body cannot take in enough sugar from the blood. To compensate for this, the body will start to break down fat to provide ketones. However, if a high level of ketones is produced, this can cause the blood to become acidic which can lead to illness and even potential danger to organs if not treated in time. This state is referred to as diabetic ketoacidosis Where can I get ketone testing kits and sensors? The most accurate way of testing for ketones is to use a meter that measures blood ketone levels. The following blood glucose meters are able to test blood ketone levels in addition to blood glucose levels: Abbott – FreeStyle Optium Neo Menarini – GlucoMen LX Plus If you take insulin, you should be able to get these prescribed by your GP. You can also test urine for ketone levels, however, urine ketone testing is not as accurate as blood ketone testing as the levels of ketones in the urine will usually only reflect a level of up to a few hours previously. When to test for ketones? People with insulin dependent diabetes should take a ketone test: Any time your blood sugar is over 17 mmol/l (300 mg/dl) If sugar levels have repeatedly been over 13 mmol/l (230 mg/dl) If you are unwell and have any of the symptoms of ketoacidosis How to do a blood ketone test A blood ketone test is carried out in a similar way to a blood glucose test Put a blood ketone strip into the meter Prick your finger using the lancing device Allow blood to the ketone strip Wait for the result Safely discard the test strip Discard the lancet into a sharps bin Note that only a select number of blood glucose meters provide ketone testing functionality. How to do a urine ketone test Before testing, check the expiry date on the tub to ensure the strips are good for use. Also check the instructions which will tell you how long you need to wait, after urine is applied to the strip, before checking the colour chart. The process for ketone testing will then usually follow steps similar to these : Remove a strip from the tub, taking care not to touch the spongy end of the strip Pass urine over the test area of the strip or, alternatively, collect urine in a container and then dip the test area of the strip into the urine Begin timing immediately after applying urine – the strip will begin to change colour After a set number of seconds (check the instructions), compare the colour of the test area to the colour chart on the side of the tub of strips Disregard any colour changes that might happen after the set number of seconds has passed What should the ketone test results be? Under 0.6 mmol/L – a normal blood ketone value 0.6 to 1.5 mmol/L – indicates that more ketones are being produced than normal, test again later to see if the value has lowered 1.6 to 3.0 mmol/L – a high level of ketones and could present a risk of ketoacidosis. It is advisable to contact your healthcare team for advice. Above 3.0 mmol/L – a dangerous level of ketones which will require immediate medical care. Ketone testing for weight loss Some people use ketone testing as a way to test whether their body is breaking down fat. Higher ketone levels indicates a greater likelihood of weight loss Note, however, that this use of ketone testing is not recommended by the NHS and ketone test strips provided by your GP are not to be used for this purpose. For people with diabetes on insulin, having high ketone levels should be regarded as potentially dangerous. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Living with Diabetes Overeating is common, harms glucose control and it is fixable with straight… 6 minute read Living with Diabetes As the days grow shorter and darker in autumn and winter, many… 3 minute read