===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes_care/diabetes-test-strips.html",
  "title": "Blood glucose test strips - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "blood_glucose",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:01:13.854897",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Blood glucose test strips - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1403,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Blood glucose test strips - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Blood glucose test strips (diabetes test strips) are a key component of blood glucose testing These small disposable strips of plastic may look insignificant but they provide a very important role in helping people with diabetes to monitor and control their diabetes. In the vast majority of cases, each meter will take one type of test strip only. There are some blood glucose meters however that take blood ketone strips as well, to test for ketone levels. How do diabetes test strips work? When blood is placed onto the test strip, it reacts with a chemical called glucose oxidase producing gluconic acid from the glucose in the blood. At the other end of the test strip, the meter transfers a current to the test strip. The test strip has electric terminals which allow the meter to measure the current between the terminals. The current between the terminals changes depending on the level of gluconic acid that has been produced. The blood glucose meter then uses an algorithm to work out the blood glucose level based upon the difference in current. Some blood glucose test strips allow the reapplication of more blood to the same test strip if needed during the test. The amount of blood required by a test strip can vary between manufacturers. Generally, between 0.5 μl to 1 μl of blood is required. Some test strips, not so commonly used these days, do not require a meter. When blood is placed on the active part of the strip and then wiped off after a specified number of seconds, the reagent will change colour and the result can be obtained by matching the colour of against a colour chart on the side of the pot. It is less accurate than using a blood glucose meter but the test strips can often be cheaper. Where can I get test strips? Within the UK, blood glucose test strips are available either free on prescription or can be bought from pharmacies or online. In the UK, all people with type 1 diabetes, or otherwise on insulin, should qualify for test strips free on prescription. People with other types of diabetes, or on other treatments, may also be given test strips on prescription but this will be judged on an individual basis. Note that if you need to buy test strips for your diabetes, you should be exempt from paying VAT on these. Ask your pharmacy for a VAT exemption form. Test strips purchased from the Diabetes.co.uk Shop are eligible for VAT relief How long do blood glucose strips last for? Blood glucose test strips will usually have a use by date on the strips or box they come in. After opening, blood glucose test strips will typically be good to use for another 3 to 6 months but refer to the box or information leaflet for advice specific to your brand of test strips. If you have more than one box of test strips, it’s a good idea to use the oldest one first, so they don’t expire. Manufacturer Test Strip Name Abbott Optium Plus Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips with 1 calibrator. For meters: Optium Optium Neo Optium Easy Optium Xceed Boots meters Abbott Freestyle Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. For meters: FreeStyle FreeStyle Freedom FreeStyle Mini FreeStyle Navigator InsuLinx Accu-Chek Aviva Test Strips Comes in packs of 10 strips or 50 strips. For meters: Accu-Chek Aviva Accu-Chek Aviva Nano Accu-Chek Aviva Combo Accu-Chek Aviva Expert Accu-Chek Active Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. For meters: Accu-Chek Active Accu-Chek Advantage Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. For meters: Accu-Chek Advantage Plus Accu Chek Compact Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. For meters: Accu-Chek Compact Accu-Chek Compact Plus AgaMatrix WaveSense Jazz Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: Wavesense Jazz Bayer Contour Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. For meters: Bayer Contour USB Bayer Contour Bayer Contour Link Bayer Didget Bayer Breeze2 Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. For meters: Bayer BREEZE2 Bayer Contour NEXT Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. For meters: Bayer Contour NEXT USB Bayer Contour XT Bayer Contour NEXT Bayer Contour NEXT Link B Braun Omnitest 3 Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. For meters: B Braun Omnitest 3 Glucoflex-R Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 strips. No meter required. GlucoRx Test Strips 50 glucose test strips for use with the GlucoRx. For meters: GlucoRx GlucoRx Nexus GlucoRx Voice Buy now IME-DC Test Strips Comes as 2 pots of 25 strips. For meters: IME-DC blood glucose meter OneTouch Ultra Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: OneTouch Ultra2 OneTouch UltraEasy OneTouch UltraSmart OneTouch Vita Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: OneTouch Vita OneTouch Verio Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: OneTouch Verio IQ OneTouch Verio Menarini GlucoMen Lx Sensor Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: GlucoMen Lx Plus GlucoMen Lx Menarini GlucoMen Visio Sensor Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: GlucoMen Visio MyLife Pura Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: MyLife Pura MyLife Pura X Nipro Diagnostics TRUEresult Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: TRUEresult TRUEresult twist Nipro Diagnostics TRUEone Test Strips TRUEone test strips come with the meter. For meters: TRUEone Sanofi BGStar test strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: Sanofi iBG Star Sanofi BG Star Spirit CareSens N Blood Test Strips Comes in packs of 50 test strips. For meters: CareSens N Storage information of blood glucose test strips The information below is generally applicable for most test strips, but refer to the information leaflet for specific advice on the test strips you use: Store test strips at room temperature Do not refrigerate, as extreme temperatures can seriously damage test strips Exposure to humidity can render test strips unusable, and so can direct sunlight Keep test strips within the closed (sealed) vial Do not use test strips that have been in contact with dirt, crumbs, food or liquids Do not use test strips if they have been damaged in any way How accurate are blood glucose testing strips? Blood glucose test strips should meet specific International Organization for Standardization (ISO) accuracy standards when used with the meter they are designed for. See the accuracy standards that test strips should meet Will test strips be needed in the future? There are a number of blood glucose monitors under development that read blood glucose levels in non-invasive ways – that is, they don’t require finger pricking. Such developments being tested include testing tears via a special contact lens, testing saliva and using a rub on temporary tattoo Continuous glucose monitors are currently available which measure glucose levels without finger pricks, although blood glucose tests are still needed at times, such as for calibration and to check whether hypos may be occurring if you get the symptoms. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Living with Diabetes Overeating is common, harms glucose control and it is fixable with straight… 6 minute read Living with Diabetes As the days grow shorter and darker in autumn and winter, many… 3 minute read