Diabetic neuropathy
Overview
Diabetic neuropathy is a type of nerve damage that can happen with diabetes. Blood sugar, also called glucose, becomes high because of diabetes. Over time, high blood sugar can injure nerves throughout the body. Diabetic neuropathy most often damages nerves in the legs and feet.

Depending on the affected nerves, diabetic neuropathy symptoms may include pain and numbness in the legs, feet and hands. It also can cause problems with the digestive system, urinary tract, blood vessels and heart. Some people have mild symptoms. But for others, diabetic neuropathy can be painful and disabling.

Diabetic neuropathy is a serious health concern. It may affect up to half of people who have diabetes. But diabetic neuropathy often can be prevented. And people who have it can take steps to keep it from getting worse. The key is to tightly manage blood sugar and lead a healthy lifestyle.

Products & Services
A Book: The Essential Diabetes Book
Symptoms
There are four main types of diabetic neuropathy. You can have one type or more than one type of neuropathy.

The symptoms depend on the type of diabetic neuropathy you have and which nerves are affected. Usually, symptoms appear slowly over time. You may not notice anything is wrong until a lot of nerve damage has happened.

Peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy
This type of neuropathy also may be called distal symmetric peripheral neuropathy. It's the most common type of diabetic neuropathy. It affects the feet and legs first, followed by the hands and arms. Symptoms often are worse at night. They may include:

Loss of feeling, also called numbness, or less ability to feel pain or temperature changes.
A tingling or burning feeling.
Sharp pains or cramps.
Muscle weakness.
Being very sensitive to touch. For some people, even a bedsheet's weight can be painful.
Serious foot problems, such as ulcers, infections, and bone and joint damage.
Autonomic neuropathy
The autonomic nervous system controls blood pressure, heart rate, sweating, pupils, bladder, digestive system and sex organs. Diabetes can affect nerves in any of these areas. That can cause symptoms including:

A lack of the usual warning symptoms that let you know when blood sugar levels are low. This is called hypoglycemia unawareness.
Drops in blood pressure when rising from sitting or lying down. This is called orthostatic hypotension. It can cause dizziness or fainting.
A fast-beating heart while at rest.
Bladder or bowel problems.
Slow stomach emptying, also called gastroparesis. This can cause upset stomach, vomiting, a feeling of fullness and loss of appetite.
Trouble swallowing.
Changes in the way the eyes adjust from light to dark or far to near.
More or less sweating than usual.
Problems with sexual response. For instance, some people may have vaginal dryness or trouble feeling aroused. Others may have trouble getting or keeping an erection.
Proximal neuropathy
This type of neuropathy also is called diabetic polyradiculopathy. It often affects nerves in the thighs, hips, buttocks or legs. It can affect the stomach area and chest area. Symptoms often are on one side of the body. Rarely, they spread to the other side. Proximal neuropathy may include:

Serious pain in the buttock, hip or thigh.
Weak and shrinking thigh muscles.
Trouble rising from a sitting position.
Pain in the chest or the walls of the stomach area.
Mononeuropathy
This type of neuropathy also is called focal neuropathy. It damages a single, specific nerve. That nerve may be in the face, torso, arm or leg. It’s possible for mononeuropathy to affect single nerves in different parts of the body at the same time. Mononeuropathy may lead to:

Trouble focusing or seeing two images of the same object, also called double vision.
Not being able to move one side of the face. This is called paralysis.
Numbness or tingling in the hand or fingers.
Weakness in the hand that may result in dropping things.
Pain in the shin or foot.
Weakness that makes it hard to lift the front part of the foot. This condition is known as foot drop.
Pain in the front of the thigh.