===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/body-piercing-and-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Body piercing and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "lifestyle",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:10:49.613957",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Body piercing and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 733,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Body piercing and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Having diabetes doesn’t you mean you can’t get a body piercing. The only thing to remember is that good diabetes control. The reason that good diabetes control is essential is because poor diabetes control can significantly increase healing times and increase the risk of developing an infection. You should also think carefully about the part of your body you want pierced. Piercings can be made to any part of your body, from your ear lobes, tongue and eyebrows to your belly button and private parts. Are there any body parts I shouldn’t get pierced? As someone with diabetes, you should avoid areas with poor circulation, such as: Ankles Shins Buttocks Or your favoured areas for insulin injection/shots You should also choose a licensed or accredited body piercer to carry out the work and let them know about your condition so that they can tailor the procedure and aftercare tips to your needs. Common risks of body piercing The common risks of body piercing are very similar to those for people without diabetes. They key addition is that you should watch our for high blood glucose levels. Infection – the pierced part of your body can become infected if the venue is not clean and you are unable to maintain good hygiene. Needles – if the needle used to pierce your skin has not been sterilised, you could be at risk of HIV, hepatitis infections or other blood-borne viruses. High blood glucose – if your blood sugar levels are higher than they should be, your piercing may take longer to heal, which in turn, could put you at risk of developing an infection. Bleeding – the procedure may cause excess bleeding, especially in areas of the body with a lot of blood vessels such as the tongue. Scarring – you may have scarring following your piercing, or it may lead to the formation of a keloid (a type of oversized scar). Post-piercing tips Following your body-modification experience, it is important that you check your blood sugar levels regularly (at least once a day) and/or stick to your usual insulin schedule. You must also ensure that you keep the pierced area of skin clean and covered until it heals. What should I do if have an infection? If the pierced part of your body becomes infected, you may have high blood sugar and develop the following symptoms: Heat sensation and pain at the site of the piercing Prolonged redness and swelling Yellow or green discharge If your blood sugar level is regularly over 10mmol, you will need to increase your insulin dose You should also test for ketones – substances that are made when the body breaks down fat for energy – on a daily basis using a ketone testing strip or meter. The build up of ketones can put you at risk of ketoacidosis, or in diabetes, diabetic ketoacidosis If you have sustained high blood sugar readings and high levels of ketones in your bloodstream (1.6 mmol/L or above), or are unsure about how to adjust your insulin doses or test for ketones, you should contact your GP or diabetes healthcare team as soon as possible. It is also vital that you seek immediate help if you feel unwell, have abdominal pain or see any sign of infection following your body piercing. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.