===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.healthline.com/health/type-2-diabetes/top-exercises",
  "title": "Top exercises for type 2 diabetes",
  "category": "lifestyle",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 3,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-27T23:14:00.249671",
  "source_name": "healthline.com",
  "document_title": "Top exercises for type 2 diabetes",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<article>",
  "word_count": 1061,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Top exercises for type 2 diabetes

Regular physical activity is important for managing type 2 diabetes. Exercises like walking, swimming, and yoga can contribute to better blood sugar management. Regular exercise and physical activity can help people with prediabetes and other types of diabetes manage their blood sugar. They can also benefit their weight management and other potential heart-related complications over time. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) encourages people to get at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity per week. If you’re sedentary and considering starting an exercise program, it’s advisable to consult a doctor first to ensure there are no restrictions or special precautions. It’s always a good idea to start gradually and build up to your personal goal. Not sure where to start? Here are some top exercises that can help you reach your fitness goals. 1. Walking You don’t need a gym membership or expensive exercise equipment to get moving. If you have a supportive pair of shoes and a safe place to walk, you can start today. In fact, you can meet your recommended minimum target for aerobic fitness by going for a brisk 30-minute walk 5 days per week. According to a 2021 research review , walking can help people with type 2 diabetes (T2D) lower their blood pressure, HbA1c levels, and body mass index (BMI). 2. Cycling Riding a bike is a low-impact activity that can help people get the physical activity they need without putting excess strain on their joints. This can be important because roughly half of those with T2D have arthritis, and there is a relationship with obesity, which is a risk factor for both prediabetes and T2D. People who develop diabetes-related nerve damage ( neuropathy ) may also experience joint pain , meaning this type of exercise can be a good activity to consider. 3. Swimming Aquatic activities provide another low impact exercise option. For example, swimming , water aerobics, aqua jogging, and other aquatic activities can give your heart, lungs, and muscles a workout while minimizing stress on your joints. A 2020 study found that water-based exercise helped people with T2D improve fitness levels, overall strength, and vascular function. 4. Team sports If you find it hard to motivate yourself to exercise, it might help to join a recreational sports team. The opportunity to socialize with teammates and the commitment you make to them might help you find the motivation you need to show up each week. Many recreational sports offer a good aerobic workout. Consider trying basketball, soccer, softball, tennis, pickleball, or handball. 5. Aerobic dance Signing up for an aerobic dance or other fitness class might also help you meet your exercise goals. Research from 2023 found that aerobic exercise can help glucose (blood sugar) levels, weig ht management, and other health benefits, specifically for those with prediabetes and extending to those with T2D. Some may choose specific classes or programs, including Zumba. This combines dance and aerobic movements for a fast-paced workout. Research from 2024 suggests that Zumba can benefit those with obesity and may help prevent T2D. 6. Weightlifting Weightlifting and other strengthening activities help build muscle mass, which can increase the number of calories you burn each day. And, according to the ADA , strength training may also help improve your blood sugar management. If you want to incorporate weightlifting into your weekly exercise routine, you can use weight machines, free weights, or even heavy household objects, such as canned goods or water bottles. To learn how to lift weights safely and effectively, consider joining a weightlifting class or asking a professional fitness trainer for guidance. 7. Resistance band exercises Weights aren’t the only tool you can use to strengthen your muscles. You can also perform a wide variety of strengthening activities with resistance bands. To learn how to incorporate them into your workouts, speak with a professional trainer, take a resistance band class, or watch a resistance band workout video. According to a 2018 study , in addition to increasing strength, exercising with resistance bands may provide modest benefits to blood sugar management. 8. Calisthenics Calisthenics involves using your own body weight to strengthen your muscles. Common calisthenics exercises include pushups, pullups, squats, lunges, and abdominal crunches. Whether you choose to strengthen your muscles with weights, resistance bands, or your own body weight, try to work out every major muscle group. Experts suggest taking a day off from muscle-strengthening activities between strength training sessions to give your body time to recover. 9. Pilates Pilates is a popular fitness program to help improve core strength, coordination, and balance. According to a 2020 study of older adult women with T2D, it may also help improve blood sugar management. Consider signing up for a Pilates class at your local gym or Pilates studio. Many instructional videos and books are also available. 10. Yoga According to the ADA , yoga and relaxation practices like qigong and mindfulness can help people with T2D manage their blood sugar, blood pressure, and weight. It might also help lower stress, improve the quality of your sleep, and boost your mood. If you’re interested in trying yoga, you can sign up for a class at a local studio or gym. A trained professional can help you learn how to move from one pose to another, using the proper posture and breathing technique. Consult your healthcare team Always discuss your health goals with a healthcare professional before starting a new exercise regimen. In general, make sure you’re adequately hydrated before, during, and after exercise. Be sure to carefully monitor your blood sugar levels to help keep them within your target range. Frequently asked questions Here are some questions people often ask about exercise for diabetes. In general, regular exercise can reduce blood sugar over time. Exercises, such as light walking, cycling, and other low impact movements, can be helpful. Exercises to avoid if you have diabetes will depend on any complications you’re experiencing due to your condition. For example, those with high blood pressure need to avoid strenuous activity and heavy lifting. Takeaway Regular physical activity is important for managing type 2 diabetes (T2D) and promoting overall health. If you have any other health conditions in addition to T2D, talk with your doctor before starting a new fitness routine. They can help you learn how to stay safe and minimize your risk of injury while meeting your fitness goals.