===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/articles/managing-diabetes-cold-weather.html",
  "title": "Managing Diabetes in Cold Weather - CDC",
  "category": "lifestyle",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 1,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:10:36.911379",
  "source_name": "cdc.gov",
  "document_title": "Managing Diabetes in Cold Weather - CDC",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 523,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Managing Diabetes in Cold Weather - CDC

May 15, 2024

Managing Diabetes in Cold Weather

What to know

Cold weather can spike your blood sugar in a few ways. But you don't have to let the weather get the upper hand. Here are tips to help you stay on top of your diabetes care when it's cold outside.

How cold weather can spike your blood sugar
Stress and insulin
Cold temperatures can stress your body. In response, your body releases stress hormones such as cortisol to provide an energy boost. These hormones reduce insulin production.
Because insulin helps the body's cells absorb blood sugar, having less insulin means that more sugar remains in the blood. Stress hormones also stimulate your liver to make and release more blood sugar, and your blood sugar levels go up.
Flu
Influenza (flu) activity often begins to increase in October and peaks between December and February. Getting the flu can trigger your body to release stress hormones to boost energy and fight infection. This causes blood sugar levels to increase.
Holidays
During the holiday season, parties, family feasts, and gift baskets may disrupt your meal plan. Bitter weather can also make it harder to stay outside and keep physically active. Changes to your meal and activity plans can increase your blood sugar.

How to stay on top of your health in cold weather
Check your blood sugar regularly, more often if you're ill or having symptoms of low blood sugar . Winter can chill your hands, making testing more painful. Try warming your hands near a heater or around a cup of warm water before testing.
Stay warm. Curl up under a blanket, do some physical activity at home, or have a cup of hot tea. But be careful when using electric blankets, heating pads, or foot warmers. You may not recognize the temperature is too high and burn your skin.
Get your flu shot every year. Flu vaccination can reduce the chance of getting the flu, visits to doctors' offices, missed work and school, and severity of illness if you get the flu.
Check your skin and feet every day. Cold weather usually comes with dry air. Indoor and car heaters can also dry your skin out. Dry, itchy skin can cause cracks in your skin, which could lead to infection. Pay close attention to your skin and feet so you can notice problems early and get them treated right away.
Add indoor activities to your daily routine. Try a yoga or Zumba video. Make it fun by asking your family or friends to join you.
Stay on track no matter what's cooking. Try healthy eating tips like cutting back on other carbs during the meal when you have a sweet treat.
Keep your medicines , supplies, and equipment away from extreme cold . You'll need to keep insulin cool but don't let it freeze. Frozen insulin doesn't work anymore, even when thawed. The cold can also damage insulin pumps and continuous glucose monitors.
Prepare a backup kit. Having a diabetes care kit can help you manage diabetes during times of emergency like a snowstorm.
Keep Reading:
Diabetes Care During Emergencies

May 14, 2024