===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/gym-and-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Going to the gym - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "lifestyle",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:11:06.135004",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Going to the gym - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 550,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Going to the gym - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Gyms are ideal settings for people with diabetes who want to lead a healthy, active lifestyle. By going to the gym, you can access a wide range of high-end sports equipment to help you stay healthy and achieve your fitness goals. They also have the benefit of being in an environment where they can socialise with others, get advice on weight loss, strength building and blood glucose control. Taking care when exercising When exercising, people with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus may need to take extra special care to avoid fluctuations in their blood sugar levels. Blood sugars can fall during, immediately after, or several hours after a workout, putting diabetics at risk of a hypo (hypoglycemia). High blood sugar (hyperglycemia) may occur for some people following a short burst of strenuous activity. For longer periods of exercise, however, blood glucose levels are more likely to decrease. For these reasons, it is recommended that people who take glucose-lowering medication (e.g. oral drugs or insulin) test their blood glucose levels before, during and after their training sessions to see how they are responding. For optimal performance, exercise should be timed so that you have energy in your system for the workout – eating a carbohydrate-based snack an hour or two before exercise and within two hours afterwards to replenish the energy used is ideal. However, those actively looking to lose weight must be careful to ensure they do not consume more Making sure you test your blood sugars Testing blood sugar or taking medication during exercise means taking your testing equipment, insulin and hypo treatments. It’s worth having at least 2 of the following as hypo treatments with you: Glucose tablets Sweets Sugary drinks With most gyms – or at least those with changing facilities, you can keep your equipment and supplies safely stored nearby while you train and if needed, take your medication and/or test blood sugar levels in relative privacy. Gym goers tips Regular physical activity, whether at the gym or at home, is vital for diabetes management. It can improve your quality of life and when combined with a healthy, balanced diet can reduce the risk of cardiovascular complications, such as heart disease. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.