===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/recreational-drugs/index.html",
  "title": "Recreational drugs - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:08:14.480864",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Recreational drugs - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 724,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Recreational drugs - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Recreational drugs are mind-altering chemical substances that are used for non-medicinal, leisure purposes (i.e. taking a substance for the sole purpose of getting ‘high’). These are split into 3 main categories: Hallucinogenics – these affect the mind and what you see, feel or hear Downers – these affect thought, heart rate and breathing Uppers – which make the body faster in terms of speech, reaction and heart rate Recreational drugs are also known as psychoactive drugs, due to their effects on one’s consciousness, cognitio, mood and behaviour. This may lead to addiction or substance abuse which, in turn, can have a detrimental effect on the user’s physical and mental health. However, the consequences of recreational drug use can be a lot more severe for people whose health is already affected by conditions such as diabetes What types of recreational drugs are there? There are many types of recreational drugs. Some people are often surprised to realise that caffeine is a drug. The most commonly used drugs are: Alcohol Alkyl Nitrite (Poppers) Amphetamines (Speed) Anabolic steroids Caffeine – found in tea and coffee Cannabis (or marijuana) Cocaine Crack Ecstasy Glue and solvents Heroin (opium) LSD Methamphetamine Tobacco (Nicotine) What effects do these drugs have? Recreational drugs affect both the mind and body, causing a wide range of feelings and emotions. Some such as amphetamines and ecstasy are stimulants which act on the central nervous system , causing an increase in heart rate and a rush of blood through the heart and brain Users often report increased confidence and energy levels combined with a physiological arousal, but as the body’s energy levels reduce they become prone to feelings of: Anxiety Irritability Restlessness Dizziness The mental and physical effects of drugs such as cannabis are noticeable but usually milder, while others such as crack and LSD are much more intense and extreme in their effects, with users often experiencing hallucinations and paranoia. There are also differences between each drug in terms of how quickly the effects are experienced, the length of time they last and the after-effects (withdrawal symptoms). How are recreational drugs administered? There are a number of ways in which these substances can be taken: Orally, as a liquid or solid Inhaled as a vapour Insufflatio, or snorted into the nose Injected either intramuscular or intravenously. Effects of recreational drugs on diabetes Many of the physical effects of recreational drugs can affect blood glucose control , which for people with diabetes can lead to serious health complications While the effects of legal drugs like alcohol and nicotine (smoking) on diabetes are well documented, the role of marijuana, cocaine and other illicit substances remains less clear because of their illegal status in the UK and many other countries. Research into illegal substances However, the research that is available on the general effects of illegal substances suggests that while they all affect diabetes control in one way or another, cannabis could also be used to help treat the disease. Previous studies have linked cannabis use to hyperglycemia (high blood glucose levels) – a common problem for people with diabetes. However, some researchers have shown that cannabis, which is already used in the treatment of some medical conditions, could also have a number of anti-diabetes benefits. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.