===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-complications/diabetes-and-yeast-infections.html",
  "title": "Thrush - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:08:58.244244",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Thrush - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 671,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Thrush - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Thrush is a yeast infection (candida albicans) which tends to affect warm, moist areas of the body such as the vagina, penis, mouth and certain areas of skin Thrush is more common in people with diabetes as high sugar levels lead to better conditions for the yeast to grow. A dry mouth coupled with a higher amount of glucose in the saliva can also make for favourable conditions for thrush. What causes thrush? High blood sugar levels is one of the main causes of thrush and so is an weakened immune system , which is also common in people with diabetes. Damaged or irritated skin also promotes the growth of thrush. Smoking increases the chance of oral thrush and certain oral contraceptives may cause vaginal thrush. Symptoms of thrush Vaginal thrush (vulvovaginal candidiasis) symptoms include: Soreness and irritation White curd appearance on the skin Pain during sexual intercourse White vaginal discharge Reddening of the vulva (the outer parts of the vagina) Itching around the vagina (infectious vaginitis) Oral thrush (oral candidiasis) symptoms include: A nasty or bitter taste Redness or bleeding inside the mouth Creamy white coloured patches (lesions) in the mouth (cheeks, lips, tongue or the back of the mouth) Painful and sore mouth (can include the throat) Cracks at the corners of the lips (angular cheilitis) Thrush in men (candida balanitis) Symptoms of thrush in men include: Reddening or swelling or soreness of the glans (head) of the penis Itching around the tip of the penis Discharge beneath the foreskin Nasty odour Pain during urination White curd-like appearance on the skin Painful experience during sex Candidal skin infections can also occur around folds of skin such as armpits and the groin. Is thrush a common problem? Thrush is a common problem and particularly for people with diabetes. Higher levels of glucose in the blood make candida all the more likely, so diabetics who have difficulty controlling their blood sugar may find themselves particularly prone to yeast infections. Is thrush serious? Occasional periods of thrush may not be a cause to worry. However, regular episodes which go untreated can lead to more serious infections. Thrush is an uncomfortable problem and it is possible to pass on to a partner. What treatments are available for thrush (candida)? Thrush may be treated by anti-fungal creams or by orally taken thrush treatments. Typically used thrush treatments include: Topical imidazole Fluconazole Itraconazole Clotrimazole Ketoconazole How can I prevent thrush from occurring? For people with diabetes, keeping blood sugar levels under control will certainly help to reduce the frequency and severity of outbreaks of yeast infections. Genital infections can be reduced by wearing looser fitting clothing (particularly underwear), washing your genitals regularly but avoiding the use of scented soaps and shampoos. Oral candidiasis can be prevented by: Maintaining good dental hygiene Brushing twice a day Rinsing your mouth after eating Flossing regularly Using mouthwash Maintaining clean dentures Regularly visiting a dentist What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.