===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-complications/diabetes-and-cancer.html",
  "title": "Cancer guide - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:09:22.091990",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Cancer guide - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 683,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Cancer guide - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Editor Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Studies have shown that diabetes carries an increased risk for a number of different forms of cancer. Having cancer with diabetes can make achieving good diabetes control much more difficult but this can be relieved to some extent. How is type 2 diabetes linked with cancer? One theory for why a link may exist is that high levels of circulating insulin (known as hyperinsulinemia ) can promote the growth of tumours. In type 2 diabetes, insulin resistance commonly causes the body to produce more insulin than normal. Another reason why a link may be present is where a harmful lifestyle may lead to obesity and therefore higher risks of both type 2 diabetes and cancer. Cancer and type 2 diabetes The risks of contracting the following cancers are shown to be doubled by the presence of type 2 diabetes: Pancreatic cancer Liver cancer Endometrial cancer (also known as womb cancer) A smaller increased risk, of 20% to 50% is seen for the following forms of cancer. Colorectal cancer Bladder cancer Breast cancer Blood cancers (non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma) The one positive is that incidences of prostate cancer are actually lower for people with type 2 diabetes. Cancer and type 1 diabetes Links between type 1 diabetes and cancer are not so well recorded but it appears there is also an increase in risk of cancers for people with type 1 diabetes The cancers with the highest increase in risk tended to be different to those noted in type 2 diabetes. The cancers with increased risk in type 1 diabetes include: Stomach cancer Cervical cancer What are the symptoms of cancer? The symptoms of cancer vary widely depending on which part of the body the cancer strikes. What treatment options are open for cancer? The main treatment options for cancer are surgery to remove the cancers or radiotherapy (also known as radiation therapy or radiation oncology). Cancer treatment and diabetes control Chemotherapy and use of glucocorticoids and steroids can exacerbate difficulties in achieving good diabetes control , particularly after meals. For this reason, doses of chemotherapy may need to be reduced and glucocorticoids and steroids doses administered through the day rather than in larger, less frequent doses. Nausea and vomiting can cause additional control difficulties in people with diabetes, particularly if strong anti-hyperglycemic medication is take, such as insulin. Speak to your healthcare team if diabetes control is becoming difficult to manage whilst undergoing cancer therapy. Preventing cancer The advice to help prevent cancer is to lead a healthy lifestyle which includes: Eating a healthy, balanced diet Taking regular physical activity Cutting down on alcohol Quitting smoking Cancer and metformin Metformin is the most common type of medication taken for type 2 diabetes. The drug has been commonly linked with lower rates of a wide variety of cancers, particularly amongst people with type 2 diabetes. A large number of different studies have produced evidence that metformin appears to lower the risk of developing cancer as well as increasing the survival rates of people with cancer. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.