===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-and-parenting.html",
  "title": "Parenting a child with diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:09:41.589375",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Parenting a child with diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 781,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Parenting a child with diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Being a parent of a child with diabetes can bring an awful lot to consider and the responsibility can be demanding. Remember, you are not alone. What diet should my son or daughter have? How will I manage his or her blood sugar levels? Will they get the right level care at school? How will my son or daughter cope with their own diabetes? We answer these questions and more and if you need more advice we have a specific Diabetes Forum for Parents and Children Parenting Guides: Children and Diabetes Diabetes at School Managing Your Child’s Diabetes Emotional Issues Free from Diabetes Explaining Type 1 Diabetes to Your Child Explaining Type 2 Diabetes to Your Child Having Hypos as a Parent Don’t forget to take a look at the dedicated Diabetes and Kids section. Coming to terms with your child’s diabetes diagnosis As a parent of a child with diabetes, the diagnosis can often be a much harder blow for the parent than for the child. Your child’s diagnosis will likely come as a great shock and it can be difficult to recognise just how much of an effect it can have on you. Read about coping with diabetes diagnosis What diet should my child have? A child with diabetes need not be prescribed a particular diabetic diet as such. However, through blood glucose testing you may find that some foods are better for your child’s blood glucose control than others. Testing before and around 2 hours after meals is a good way to see how different meals affect your child’s blood sugar. As with dietary advice for people in general, your child should have a balanced diet to include plenty of vegetables. Managing your child’s blood sugar control Watching out for hypos, being aware of hyperglycemia, monitoring and recording blood glucose levels and making sure they’re taking their doses are all involved as part of managing your child’s blood sugar It can be a tall order at times but a little extra knowledge can go a long way. Should my diabetic child take part in sports? Sports are a great activity for your child to take part in. They’ll help your child to stay fit and healthy and they’re good for the social aspects. Playing sports will lower your child’s blood sugar so they will need to test their blood before playing sports. If a pre-sport sugar level is low or high they should not start until the level has returned to normal, as hypoglycemia could result from a low and ketones could be produced if exercising when too high. Children and diabetes at school To help you ensure your child gets the best education out of school, we’ve prepared advice on children with diabetes at school Coping with emotional issues Growing up can be an emotional time in itself and diabetes can emphasise these emotions. Read more about the emotional issues diabetic children may have Diabetic children and social life It can be a temptation to be protective of your child when it comes to their social life but bear in mind that being overprotective in limiting their social life could lead to emotional difficulties later in life. If you’re unsure where to draw the line, it may help to speak to other parents with diabetes. Talking to other parents of children with diabetes Sometimes knowing what’s best for your child can be very confusing. Connecting with other parents who have children with diabetes can help to determine the best course of action. You can discuss diabetes with other parents on our diabetes youth club forum What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.