===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.healthline.com/health/diabetes/effects-on-body",
  "title": "How diabetes affects your body",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 3,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-27T23:12:42.352812",
  "source_name": "healthline.com",
  "document_title": "How diabetes affects your body",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<article>",
  "word_count": 1621,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
How diabetes affects your body

Diabetes can affect many parts of your body, including heart, kidneys, eyes, feet, and legs. Various complications are possible the longer you live with the condition and if you have high blood sugar levels over time. When you hear the word “diabetes,” your first thought is likely about high blood sugar. Blood sugar is often an underestimated component of your health. An imbalance in blood sugar levels over a period of time could develop into diabetes. Diabetes affects your body’s ability to produce or use insulin , a hormone that allows your body to turn glucose (sugar) into energy. Below are the symptoms that may occur in your body when diabetes develops. Diabetes can be effectively managed when diagnosed early. However, when left untreated, it can lead to potential complications that include: heart disease stroke kidney damage nerve damage Usually after you eat or drink, your body will break down sugars from your food and use them to generate energy in your cells. To make this happen, your pancreas needs to produce a hormone called insulin. Insulin is what helps the process of taking sugar from the blood and passing it to the cells for use or energy. If you have diabetes, your pancreas either produces too little insulin or none at all. The insulin can’t be used effectively. This allows blood glucose levels to rise while the rest of your cells are deprived of much-needed energy. This can lead to a wide variety of problems affecting every major body system. Types of diabetes The effect of diabetes on your body also depends on the type of diabetes you have. There are two main types of diabetes: type 1 and type 2 . Type 1 , also called juvenile diabetes or insulin-dependent diabetes, is an immune system disorder. Your immune system attacks the insulin-producing cells in your pancreas, destroying your body’s ability to make insulin. With type 1 diabetes, you must take insulin to live. Most people receive their type 1 diagnosis as a child or young adult. Type 2 is related to insulin resistance . It used to occur in older populations, but now more younger populations are developing type 2 diabetes. This is a result of certain lifestyle, dietary, and exercise habits. With type 2 diabetes, your pancreas stops using insulin effectively. This further causes issues with using sugar from the blood and converting it into energy. Eventually, this can lead to the need for insulin medication. You can effectively manage earlier phases like prediabetes with a balanced diet, exercise, and careful monitoring of blood sugars. This can also prevent the development of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes is a manageable condition. In some cases, it can even go into remission if needed lifestyle changes are made. Gestational diabetes is high blood sugar that develops during pregnancy. Most of the time, you can manage gestational diabetes through diet and exercise. It also typically resolves after the delivery of the baby. Gestational diabetes can increase your risk of complications during pregnancy. It can also increase the risk of developing type 2 diabetes later in life for both you and your child. Endocrine, excretory, and digestive systems If your pancreas produces little or no insulin — or if your body can’t use it — other hormones are used to turn fat into energy. This can create high levels of toxic chemicals, including acids and ketone bodies, which may lead to a condition called diabetic ketoacidosis . Diabetic ketoacidosis is a serious complication of the disease. Symptoms include: extreme thirst excessive urination fatigue Your breath may have a sweet scent caused by the elevated levels of ketones in the blood. High blood sugar levels and excess ketones in your urine can confirm diabetic ketoacidosis. If untreated, this condition can lead to loss of consciousness or even death. Diabetic hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome (HHS) occurs in type 2 diabetes. It involves very high blood glucose levels but no ketones. You might become dehydrated with this condition. You may even lose consciousness. HHS is most common in people whose diabetes is undiagnosed or who haven’t been able to manage their diabetes well. It can also occur due to a heart attack, stroke, or infection. High blood glucose levels may cause gastroparesis . This is when it’s hard for your stomach to completely empty. This delay can cause blood glucose levels to rise. As a result, you may also experience: nausea vomiting bloating heartburn Kidney damage Diabetes can also damage your kidneys and affect their ability to filter waste from your blood. If your doctor detects microalbuminuria or increased amounts of protein in your urine, it could be a sign that your kidneys aren’t functioning properly. Kidney disease related to diabetes is called diabetic nephropathy . This condition doesn’t show symptoms until its later stages. If you have diabetes, your doctor will evaluate you for nephropathy to help prevent irreversible kidney damage or kidney failure . Circulatory system Diabetes raises your risk of developing high blood pressure , which puts further strain on your heart. When you have high blood glucose levels, this can contribute to the formation of fatty deposits in blood vessel walls. Over time, it can restrict blood flow and increase the risk of atherosclerosis , or narrowing of the blood vessels due to plaque buildup within them. According to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) , diabetes doubles your risk of heart disease and stroke. In addition to monitoring and managing your blood glucose, healthy eating habits and regular exercise can help lower the risk of high blood pressure and high cholesterol levels . If you smoke, consider quitting if you’re at risk of diabetes. Smoking increases your risk of cardiovascular problems and may cause restricted blood flow. Your doctor can help you create a quit plan. Lack of blood flow can eventually affect your hands and feet, and cause pain while you’re walking. This is called intermittent claudication . The narrowed blood vessels in your legs and feet may also cause problems in those areas. For example, your feet may feel cold, or you may be unable to feel heat due to a lack of sensation. This condition is known as peripheral neuropathy , which is a type of diabetic neuropathy that causes decreased sensation in the extremities. It’s particularly dangerous because it may prevent you from noticing an injury or infection. Diabetes also increases your risk of developing infections or ulcers of the foot . Inadequate blood flow and nerve damage may increase the likelihood of having a foot or leg amputated (removed). If you have diabetes, it’s critical that you take good care of your feet and inspect them often. Integumentary system Diabetes can also affect your skin , the largest organ of your body. Along with dehydration, your body’s lack of moisture due to high blood sugar can cause the skin on your feet to dry and crack. It’s important to completely dry your feet after bathing or swimming. You can use petroleum jelly or gentle creams, but avoid letting these areas become too moist. Moist, warm folds in the skin are susceptible to fungal or bacterial infections. These tend to develop in the following areas: between fingers and toes the groin armpits corners of the mouth Symptoms include redness or other color changes, blistering, and itchiness. High-pressure spots under your foot can lead to calluses. These can contract infection or develop ulcers. If you do get an ulcer, see a doctor immediately to lower the risk of losing your foot. You may also be more prone to: boils folliculitis (infection of the hair follicles) styes infected nails Unmanaged diabetes can also lead to three skin conditions: Eruptive xanthomatosis: causes hard yellow bumps with a red ring (caused by excessive cholesterol levels) Digital sclerosis: causes thick skin, most often on the hands or feet. Diabetic dermopathy: can cause brown patches on the skin. There’s no cause for concern and no treatment is necessary. These skin conditions usually clear up when the body attains optimal blood sugar levels. Central nervous system Diabetes causes diabetic neuropathy or damage to the nerves. This can affect your perception of heat, cold, and pain. It can also make you more susceptible to injury. The chances that you won’t notice these injuries and let them develop into serious infections or conditions increases, too. Diabetes can also lead to swollen and leaky blood vessels in the eye, called diabetic retinopathy . This can damage your vision. It may even lead to blindness. Symptoms of eye trouble can be mild at first, so it’s important to see your eye doctor regularly. Reproductive system Changes in hormones during pregnancy can cause gestational diabetes and, in turn, increase your risk of high blood pressure. Two types of high blood pressure conditions that you need to watch out for during pregnancy: preeclampsia and eclampsia . In most cases, gestational diabetes is easily managed, and glucose levels return to normal after the baby is born. Symptoms are similar to other types of diabetes but may also include repeated infections affecting the vagina and bladder. If you develop gestational diabetes, your baby may have a higher birth weight. This can make delivery more complicated. You’re also at an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes several years following your baby’s delivery. To learn more about diabetes, visit our topic center . It can also be helpful to connect with other people who understand what you’re going through. Our free app, T2D Healthline, connects you with real people living with type 2 diabetes. Ask questions, give advice, and build relationships with people who get it. Download the app for iPhone or Android. Read this article in Spanish .