===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/beating-sexual-problems.html",
  "title": "Beating sexual problems - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:08:25.104219",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Beating sexual problems - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 609,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Beating sexual problems - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Sexual problems can be disheartening but they needn’t take all the pleasure out of your sex life. This article looks at how to work around sexual difficulties if treatment is either not possible or not desired. Direct treatments are covered within our guides on erectile dysfunction , female sexual dysfunction and low libido Loss of sensation Diabetes can affect our nerves, in the form of neuropathy , and loss of sensation in the penis, clitoris and vagina is possible as well. Trying out different positions may help to find positions which enhance sensation and therefore make reaching orgasm easier. Oral sex Oral sex can be pleasurable to give or receive whether climax is involved or not. Oral sex can be a good option if you’re having unexpected difficulties and can also keep your sex life alive and kicking when sexual dysfunction is a longer term issue. When climax is unobtainable Climax may not always be possible for one reason or another. Reasons for having difficulty reaching climax include having loss of sensitivity, psychological issues and having low blood sugar As we age, we may find it harder to reach climax. If an orgasm seems unobtainable, switch the focus of your love making either onto pleasuring your partner or in building an intimate sensual bond. If you can have penetrative sex but cannot orgasm, positions which maximise body to body contact, eye contact and kissing can be sensual and fulfilling without necessarily requiring climax. Communicate with your partner If you are having difficulties, it’s important to let your partner know. If you’re not having as much sex as you used to, chances are that your partner will have recognised even if it hasn’t been mentioned. If you address the issue, it’ll save your partner from being anxious and having to guess to why you’re not having sex so often. The communication can help to ease any tension that may be present and may allow you and your partner to re-ignite your sex life in alternative ways. Loss of sex drive Many of us will experience periods of lower sex drive. Sometimes it’s temporary, sometimes a longer term issue. There are a number of reasons why sex drive may be lost which can range from psychological issues, including depression, to side effects of medication and long term illnesses. Diabetes itself can sometimes be a factor involved in a reduced sex drive. Understanding the possible causes may help you to address low libido and your health team may be able to advise you to help you rediscover your sex drive. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.