===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-and-amputation.html",
  "title": "Amputation - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "complication/foot_care",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:14:08.928877",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Amputation - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 505,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Amputation - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Editor Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Diabetes, when present in the body over many years, can give rise to all sorts of complications. These include heart disease , kidney disease, retinopathy and neuropathy If left untreated, some of these complications can become extremely damaging to the body. Diabetes is a leading cause of amputation The NHS reports that people who have diabetes are 15 times more likely to undergo amputations than other people without the condition. Diabetes is one of the leading causes of amputation of the lower limbs throughout the world. Charity Diabetes UK notes that problems of the foot are the most frequent reasons for hospitalisation amongst patients who have diabetes. Many hospital visits due to diabetes-related foot problems are preventable through simple foot care routines All people who have diabetes should have foot check-ups as a part of their regular care routine. What factors lead to amputation? Several key factors usually predispose ulceration and ultimately amputation. These include: Neuropathy Circulation problems Foot ulcers Charcot foot Other damage to the foot How are these factors assessed? Diabetic foot complications are more common amongst the elderly, and amputation rates do increase with age. For people over 75 years old, the risk does increase considerably. All people who have diabetes should have a basic education in foot care, and beyond this they should have regular foot examinations The risk for the development of ulceration can be assessed by basic clinical examination of the foot. What are major and minor amputations? Amputations in general, not just diabetes-related amputations, are classed as major and minor. Minor amputation regards removal of toes or feet Major amputation refers to the above or below the knee amputation. How should I identify a foot at risk from amputation? Look for any signs of damage to the foot, this could be cuts, sores, burns, blisters or ulcers. In people with reduced circulation or sensation in the foot, even small damage could be significant. Please see: Diabetes Footcare What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.