===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/type1-diabetes-symptoms.html",
  "title": "Type 1 diabetes symptoms - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diagnosis",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:02.787211",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Type 1 diabetes symptoms - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 714,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Type 1 diabetes symptoms - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Type 1 diabetes is different to its more common counterpart, type 2 diabetes Whilst the major symptoms of diabetes are similar for type 1 and type 2, it is worth knowing the specific symptoms of type 1 diabetes as well as more general diabetes symptoms Also see: Type 1 diabetes The 4Ts – symptoms of type 1 diabetes Some of the most noticeable and most common symptoms of type 1 diabetes are: Excessive thirst Unusually high levels of urination Feeling tired all the time Loss of muscular bulk and unexplained weight loss The main symptoms of type 1 diabetes are often referred to as the 4Ts of type 1 diabetes Other symptoms which may accompany the above symptoms are: Itchiness around the penis or vagina Blurring of vision (caused by dryness of the eyes) Unexpected cramping Skin infections Emergency diabetes symptoms Seek urgent medical attention if diabetes symptoms combine with any of the following: A serious loss of appetite Nausea and vomiting A temperature Pains in the stomach A fruity, chemical smell on the breath (most often likened to pear drops or nail varnish) The symptoms above could be a sign of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), a dangerous condition that can be life threatening if medical treatment is not provided immediately. Around 1 in 4 people diagnosed with type 1 diabetes are suffering with ketoacidosis at the time of diagnosis. Recognising the 4 main symptoms of type 1 diabetes can help to get a diagnosis before ketoacidosis sets in. Read more on ketoacidosis Common symptoms of diabetes Polydipsia Polyuria Polyphagia Fatigue Dizziness Weight Loss Blurred Vision Slow Healing Genital Itchiness Nausea How long does it take to develop type 1 symptoms? The symptoms of type 1 diabetes in children and young adults tend to develop quickly over a few weeks or few days. Type 1 diabetes is a dangerous condition if it is left untreated for too long. It is therefore important to seek a diagnosis from your doctor if you or your child is showing the symptoms of type 1 diabetes. Type 1 diabetes can develop at any age. Adults may develop a specific form of type 1 diabetes known as LADA (latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood) LADA tends to develop more slowly than type 1 diabetes in children and young adults and people with LADA may sometimes be misdiagnosed as having type 2 diabetes. Can a blood glucose meter help to diagnose type 1 diabetes? A blood glucose meter may be helpful in indicating whether you or a family member may have diabetes. It is not essential to have a blood glucose meter but it may be considered useful in a family with a history of type 1 diabetes or autoimmune conditions. A blood glucose result, taken over 2 hours after eating, of over 7.8 mmol/l could indicate a presence of diabetes. If high results are being recorded 2 hours after eating for consecutive meals, contact your GP who will be able to carry out a diagnosis It is important that devices used to draw blood from fingers are not shared to prevent the risk of blood borne illnesses. See our guide on how to do a home blood glucose test What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.