===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-types.html",
  "title": "Types of diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diagnosis",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:08.006370",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Types of diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 620,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Types of diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail There are a number of different types of diabetes, some of which are more prevalent than others. The most common form of diabetes in the general population is type 2 diabetes, which often develops from pre-diabetes Type 1 diabetes is more common in children and gestational diabetes is a form of diabetes that can occur during pregnancy. Learn more about the different types of diabetes: Diabetes Types Type 1 Diabetes Type 2 Diabetes Gestational Diabetes Diabetes LADA Diabetes MODY Double Diabetes Type 3 Diabetes Steroid Induced Diabetes Brittle Diabetes Secondary Diabetes Diabetes Insipidus Juvenile Diabetes Which type of diabetes do I have? In some cases, it may not be clear which type of diabetes you have. If your doctor cannot be sure which type of diabetes you have, they may run one or more tests to help determine your diabetes type Learn about the differences between type 1 and type 2 diabetes Conditions which can lead to diabetes Some conditions, including genetic syndromes and surgery, can lead to high blood glucose levels and therefore diabetes. Such types of diabetes account for around 1 to 2% of all diagnosed cases of diabetes. Examples of such conditions include: Glucagonoma – a condition in which the body produces too much of the hormone glucagon Chronic pancreatitis – a condition which causes inflammation of the pancreas Cystic fibrosis – a genetic condition that causes mucus to build up in the lungs and digestive system Pancreatectomy – surgical removal of the pancreas Conditions linked with type 2 diabetes There are a number of conditions that are not necessarily a direct cause but are closely linked with type 2 diabetes. Conditions closely linked with type 2 diabetes include: Alzheimer’s disease – as noted above, this has been referred to as type 3 diabetes by some researchers Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) – a condition which can impact on fertility in women Cushing’s Syndrome – a condition characterised by excess production of the hormone cortisol Pancreatic cancer – has been linked with type 2 diabetes with some debate as to which condition may influence the other Conditions linked with type 1 diabetes Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease, meaning that the body’s immune system mistakes its own cells for invading pathogens that need to be destroyed. People with type 1 diabetes tend to have a higher risk of having other autoimmune diseases than the rest of the population. Other autoimmune diseases include: Coeliac disease Rheumatoid arthritis Addisons disease Autoimmune thyroid disease What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Types of Diabetes Type 3c diabetes, also known as pancreatogenic diabetes, is a form of… 4 minute read