===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/type1-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Type 1 diabetes overview - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diagnosis",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:10.933648",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Type 1 diabetes overview - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1162,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Type 1 diabetes overview - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 14 February 2026 Author Mike Watts Tags diabetes , insulin , Type 1 Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease that causes the insulin producing beta cells in the pancreas to be destroyed, preventing the body from being able to produce enough insulin to adequately regulate blood glucose levels. Type 1 diabetes may sometimes be referred to as  juvenile diabetes , however, this term is generally regarded as outdated as, whilst it is commonly diagnosed in children, the condition can develop at any age. Insulin dependent diabetes  is another term that may sometimes be used to describe type 1 diabetes. Because type 1 diabetes causes the loss of insulin production, it therefore requires regular insulin administration either by injection or by insulin pump. Type 1 diabetes symptoms Type 1 diabetes symptoms should be acted upon immediately, as without treatment this type of diabetes can be deadly. Symptoms include: Above average thirst Tiredness during the day Needing to pee regularly Unexplained weight loss Genital itchiness Type 1 diabetes tends to develop more slowly in adults than it does in children and in some cases type 1 diabetes in adults may be misdiagnosed as type 2 diabetes. Type 1 diabetes in adults over 35 years old will sometimes be referred to as  Latent Autoimmune Diabetes of Adulthood (LADA) . See more information on  recognising the signs of type 1 diabetes Type 1 causes Type 1 diabetes is caused by a fault in the body’s immune response in which the immune system mistakenly targets and kills beta cells, the cells in the pancreas responsible for producing insulin. As more insulin producing cells in the pancreas are killed off, the body can no longer control its blood glucose levels and the symptoms of diabetes begin to appear. What causes the initial fault in the immune system is yet to be discovered, however, research suggests that the condition results from a combination of genetic predisposition with an environmental trigger. What triggers the immune system to behave this way is yet to be conclusively identified. To date, the strongest evidence points towards a virus as being the most likely trigger. Read more about the  causes of type 1 diabetes Diagnosis If you show signs of having diabetes, your doctor may use blood or urine tests to diagnose diabetes. Your doctor should consider which type of diabetes you have as this can affect how your diabetes is treated. If the type of diabetes is unclear, your doctor may decide to carry out one or more of the following tests: Ketone test GAD autoantibodies test C-pepide test Because type 1 diabetes can develop quickly within children and young adults, a diagnosis of type 1 diabetes should be followed by same day referral to a multidisciplinary paediatric diabetes care team. Treatment for type 1 diabetes The impairment of the pancreas’ ability to produce insulin in type 1 diabetes means that  insulin treatment  is necessary. Most people will take insulin by injection with  insulin pens.  Insulin can also be delivered by wearing an  insulin pump.  Use of an insulin pump will be considered in people that express an interest in having one and that meet certain eligibility criteria. It is important that you are given education on how to balance insulin doses with dietary intake and physical activity and how to use blood glucose testing to help you control your diabetes. Staying  physically active and exercising  regularly and eating a  healthy diet  are also important towards maintaining good blood glucose control and minimising the risk of long term diabetes complications. Although diet and exercise have a role to play in type 1 diabetes management, they cannot reverse the disease or eliminate the need for insulin. How to test your blood glucose How to treat a hypo How to inject insulin If you have recently been diagnosed, see our  newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes  guide. Type 1 diabetes and complications Type 1 diabetes is a serious condition which can carry a significant risk of both short term and long term complications. Short term complications Short term complications can occur if blood glucose levels go too low or if insulin injections are missed. The short term complications that can occur are: Hypoglycemia  – too low blood sugar levels Ketoacidosis  – which can occur if insulin doses are missed or blood glucose levels become too high Long term complications Type 1 diabetes can lead to the development of the following long term diabetes complications: Heart disease Stroke Retinopathy Kidney disease Neuropathy Whilst the list of complications is a scary prospect, the chances of developing these can be significantly reduced by maintaining good control of your blood glucose levels and ensuring you attend all your  diabetic complication screening appointments . Prevention In the future,  research  may find a way to halt the development of type 1 diabetes but, to date, no intervention has successfully prevented type 1 diabetes in humans. Type 1 diabetes research Researchers from around the globe are looking for ways to improve type 1 diabetes treatment and to investigate possible cures. Important research areas include: Artificial pancreas Encapsulated islet cells Diabetes vaccines Type 1 diabetes facts The risk of developing type 1 diabetes can be  affected by your genetics  ; i.e. if your parents or siblings have type 1 diabetes. In terms of inheritance of type 1 diabetes – there is a 2% risk if the mother has type 1 diabetes, 8% risk if the father has type 1 diabetes; and a 30% risk of the child developing type 1 diabetes if both parents are type 1  [5] Within 20 years of diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, nearly all of those diagnosed have some degree of  retinopathy   [1] There is also a sub-type of type 1 diabetes known as  brittle diabetes . Famous people with type 1 diabetes include: Young pop-rock sensation  Nick Jonas Actress  Sharon Stone From the UK, extreme snowboarder  Chris Southwell What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.