===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/causes-of-type2-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Causes of type 2 diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diagnosis",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:32.876933",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Causes of type 2 diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 822,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Causes of type 2 diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail It is difficult to be conclusive when identifying a cause for a long term condition such as type 2 diabetes, when a number of contributing factors may be present. Key to the development of type 2 diabetes is the body’s inability to properly respond to insulin . Researchers from around the globe have studied data and carried out experiments to try to understand what may cause insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes to develop. Risk factors for type 2 diabetes There are a number risk factors that are closely linked to type 2 diabetes, but research is yet to provide clear answers as to how much these factors may be a cause or otherwise an association. Type 2 diabetes risk factors include: Carrying too much excess body fat Having high blood pressure or cholesterol Having a close family member with type 2 diabetes Having previously had gestational diabetes Read more about risk factors for type 2 diabetes Diet Dietary factors are often viewed as a prominent cause of diabetes and often incorrect assumptions that it is the only factor linked to a cause are made. Research indicates that diet can play a part in type 2 diabetes but it is still one factor amongst many others that can apply and generalisations should not be drawn without the consideration of other contributing factors. Genetic Research has uncovered a number of genes which are associated with an increased risk of diabetes. There are a number of factors which can influence our blood sugar levels, including where we distribute fat on our body and how well our muscles take up glucose from the blood. Our genes help to control each process in the body and a variation in just one gene which plays a part in metabolism can increase the risk of having difficulty with controlling blood sugar later in life. To date researchers have identified over 60 genes associated with type 2 diabetes. Read more about genetic research and type 2 diabetes Medication A number of medications have been linked with increased risks of type 2 diabetes. Some of these medications include the following: Corticosteroids Thiazides Beta-blockers Statins It may sometimes be difficult to distinguish how much medications may raise the risk of type 2 diabetes in people that are already at risk and how much medications may have been the primary causal factor. In cases where medication is thought to be the primary cause of diabetes, this may be termed as drug induced diabetes Stress Stress causes a response from the body to release hormones including the natural steroid hormone cortisol. The stress hormones prepare the body for action by raising blood pressure , blood sugar levels and stiffening muscles but also temporarily suppress the immune system and the digestive process. Persistently being stressed is referred to as chronic stress and this can have negative effects on health. Research indicates that there is a significant link between chronic stress and insulin resistance. Pollution, chemicals and plastics Type 2 diabetes has been one of the fastest growing conditions over the course of the last century and researchers have been looking at what other factors could be contributing to the steep rise in incidence. In recent years, research has been published which indicates that pollution and other chemicals which we commonly face in our daily lives might increase the risks of type 2 diabetes. Amongst the chemicals and pollutants that have been linked with diabetes are traffic pollution and a type of chemical, found in plastics and some make up products, called phthalates. Read news on chemicals, pollutants and diabetes risk: Children are ‘particularly susceptible’ to air pollution which can alter the structure of their brain, study shows ‘Evidence is mounting’ that soil pollution can lead to cardiovascular disease Higher levels of air pollution can affect children’s academic skills, research shows What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.