===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/249413",
  "title": "Type 1 diabetes overview",
  "category": "diagnosis",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 3,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-27T23:08:41.682372",
  "source_name": "medicalnewstoday.com",
  "document_title": "Type 1 diabetes overview",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<article>",
  "word_count": 1571,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Type 1 diabetes overview

Typically, a person’s fasting blood glucose level should be below 99 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL). Keeping blood glucose levels within a healthy range can reduce the risk of diabetes and heart disease. Glucose is a sugar that supplies energy to cells in the body. The body breaks down other carbohydrates into glucose for energy, storing any excess glucose it does not need. For balance, people need enough glucose to fuel cells, but not so much that there are consistently high amounts in the bloodstream. Blood glucose monitoring gives people insight into the amount of sugar that the blood is transporting at that time. In this article, we look at the ideal target levels for blood glucose, provide an overview of glucose itself, and explain how to keep blood sugar readings within the right range. What is a healthy blood sugar level? The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) considers a healthy fasting blood sugar level to be below 99 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) . In people with diabetes , these levels will change more. Instead of targeting a specific level, the aim of managing blood sugar is to keep the levels within a healthy range. Blood glucose levels can change throughout the day. After eating, levels rise and then settle after about an hour. They are at their lowest point before the first meal of the day. The American Diabetes Association recommends target levels of 80 to 130 mg/dL before eating if a person has diabetes. Within 2 hours of eating a meal, blood glucose levels should be less than 180 mg/dL. High blood glucose levels Consistently high blood sugar levels , or hyperglycemia , mean a person has fasting blood glucose levels of above 125 mg/dL and above 180 mg/dL, 2 hours after eating. Hyperglycemia can develop due to problems with insulin. Insulin is a hormone that tells the body when to store excess glucose, which helps the body regulate how much is in a person’s blood. When there is either not enough insulin in the body to respond to glucose levels or when cells become less sensitive to insulin, glucose can remain in the blood. Over time, this can eventually lead to type 2 diabetes . Other causes of high glucose levels include: endocrine disorders, such as Cushing’s syndrome certain medications, such as corticosteroids , phenytoin , or estrogen damage to the pancreas intravenous administered nutrition gestational diabetes The symptoms of hyperglycemia can include: a dry mouth frequent urination increased thirst fatigue lightheadedness blurred vision headache nausea weakness If hyperglycemia contributes to the development of diabetes, a person can experience more serious complications due to damage to nerves, blood vessels, or organs. This could include: vision loss kidney disease leading to kidney failure foot ulcers permanent nerve damage, causing numbness and tingling slow wound healing increased risk of heart attack or stroke A 2020 study has also linked extremely high or low blood glucose levels to cognitive decline due to reduced blood flow in the brain and other changes that can affect thought processes. Low blood glucose levels Hypoglycemia is when blood sugar concentrations fall below 70 mg/dL . It is most common in people with type 1 diabetes. Some other causes of hypoglycemia can include: malnourishment anorexia insulin misuse, or diabulimia prolonged alcohol consumption cortisol deficiency serious illness some medications some rare tumors, which may consume glucose or produce chemicals similar to insulin Some early signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia include: tingling lips trembling in the hands and other parts of the body pale face sweating palpitations or increased heart rate anxiety dizziness or lightheadedness Less commonly, the person may experience seizures or lose consciousness. Left untreated, severe hypoglycemia can be fatal, particularly among those with type 1 diabetes. What is glucose? Glucose is the body’s main source of energy. It is a simple sugar that cells in the body can easily use to power themselves. Sugars and complex carbohydrates make up the principal dietary carbohydrates. Sugars can include fructose , lactose, maltose, and sucrose , or table sugar. Complex carbohydrates include starches and some types of dietary fiber . After an individual consumes food, the body breaks carbohydrates down into glucose, which goes straight from the digestive system into the bloodstream. However, glucose can only enter cells if enough insulin is also circulating in the bloodstream. The pancreas releases insulin automatically to move glucose from the blood to the cells. As more cells receive the glucose they need, blood sugar levels return to usual levels. The liver and muscles store excess glucose as glycogen. If a person does not eat for a short period, blood glucose concentrations will fall. The pancreas releases another hormone, glucagon , to trigger the breakdown of glycogen into glucose, pushing blood sugar levels back up to maintain homeostasis. Maintaining balanced blood glucose levels People can maintain steady and moderate blood glucose levels by thinking about the quantity and types of carbohydrates they eat. The amount of energy everyone needs per day can vary, but generally, the Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends around 130 grams of carbohydrates for adults. However, not all carbohydrates are equally beneficial. Foods that contain high amounts of simple sugars cause rapid increases in blood sugar levels. When a person eats these foods frequently or in large amounts, their blood glucose levels may remain consistently high. In contrast, foods with more complex carbohydrates do not cause such a rapid rise in blood sugar. They can lead to a slow, steady release of energy in the body instead. As a result, health experts recommend focusing on more complex carbohydrates, such as: whole grain bread oats, quinoa , buckwheat , and other grains lentils, beans , and pulses unsweetened whole grain breakfast cereals In contrast, simple carbohydrates include foods containing added sugars , such as: candy soda sweetened yogurts and desserts As a guide, around half a person’s plate should consist of fruits and vegetables , with a quarter for protein and another quarter for grains. The glycemic index and blood glucose The glycemic index (GI) rates foods based on how quickly they raise blood sugar. It can be a convenient way of understanding the complexity of a specific carbohydrate. However, the United Kingdom charity Diabetes UK emphasizes that GI has some limitations. For example, fat and protein slow the breakdown of carbohydrates into glucose. This means that foods such as chips have a lower GI rating than potatoes because they contain oil. The GI also does not account for how foods interact with one another when a person eats them together. For example, honey has a moderate GI rating, but this could reduce if a person mixes honey into oatmeal , which has a low GI rating. As a result, it is important to consider the overall amount of carbohydrates a person is eating first and foremost and to consider GI within the context of a balanced diet. Learn more about high GI foods . Other tips to manage blood glucose levels In addition to being mindful of carbohydrates, there are other ways people can manage their blood glucose levels, such as: eating at regular mealtimes not skipping meals or fasting if low blood sugar is a concern eating enough protein, ideally lean proteins drinking enough water maintaining a moderate weight for a person’s height and age getting at least 150 minutes of moderate to intense exercise per week, if possible getting enough sleep each night What is blood glucose monitoring? Blood glucose monitoring involves taking a small sample of blood to test the amount of sugar in it. People can purchase blood glucose monitors for use at home. These devices come with lancets, or tiny needles, as well as test strips. Some come with a logbook to record results, while other devices may store this data electronically. Frequent monitoring is essential to managing diabetes. Many people with diabetes must check their blood glucose several times each day to plan for activities and meals, as well as scheduling doses of medications, including insulin. How to use a glucose meter To use a glucometer: Set out the glucose meter, a test strip, the lancet device, and an alcohol prep pad. Wash the hands with warm, soapy water and dry thoroughly. Turn the glucose meter on and insert a test strip when the device is ready. Wipe the planned site of injection with an alcohol prep pad and wait for the alcohol to evaporate. Prick the finger with the lancet and gently squeeze the finger until a small drop of blood develops. Place the drop of blood on the strip. Wait for the glucose meter to process the data. Read the result on the screen of the glucose meter and make a record of it. Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) can be an alternative method for people with diabetes. Summary People should aim for fasting blood glucose levels that are below 99 mg/dL. Consistently high or low blood sugar levels can lead to harmful complications. People can maintain healthy blood glucose levels by eating moderate amounts of carbohydrates and focusing more on complex carbohydrates and less on simple carbohydrates. Exercise, regular meals, adequate sleep, and weight management are also important factors. Monitoring blood sugar can help people make sure levels stay within a healthy range. Any person who has symptoms of low or high blood sugar should see a doctor, whether or not they have a diagnosis of diabetes.