===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/pre-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Prediabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diagnosis",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:20.621281",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Prediabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 873,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Prediabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Prediabetes, also commonly referred to as borderline diabetes, is a metabolic condition and growing global problem that is closely tied to obesity. If undiagnosed or untreated, prediabetes can develop into type 2 diabetes; which whilst treatable is currently not fully reversible. What is prediabetes? Prediabetes is characterised by the presence of blood glucose levels that are higher than normal but not yet high enough to be classed as diabetes. For this reason, prediabetes is often described as the “gray area” between normal blood sugar and diabetic levels. In the UK, around 7 million people are estimated to have prediabetes and thus have a high risk for developing type 2 diabetes. [17] Prediabetes may be referred to as impaired fasting glucose (IFT) , if you have higher than normal sugar levels after a period of fasting, or as impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) , if you have higher than normal sugar levels following eating. The increasing number of new cases of prediabetes presents a global concern as it carries large scale implications towards the future burden on healthcare. Between 2003 and 2011, the prevalence of prediabetes in England alone more than tripled, with 35.3% of the adult population, or 1 in every 3 people having prediabetes. [106] Learn more about prediabetes Prediabetes is a critical stage in the development of diabetes, for it is at this point that lifestyle choices can be made to turn it around. Early, decisive action can slow down or even halt the development of type 2 diabetes Explore Prediabetes Diabetes Risk Factors Tests for Pre-Diabetes Metabolic Syndrome Insulin Resistance Glucose Intolerance Diabetes and Ethnicity Diabetes and Obesity Waist Size Risk Impaired Fasting Glycemia Impaired Glucose Tolerance What are the symptoms of prediabetes? Many people have prediabetes but are completely unaware of it. This is because the condition often develops gradually without any warning signs or symptoms. In many cases, the sufferer only learns of their borderline diabetic state once the symptoms of type 2 diabetes start to appear. Therefore, being aware of the risk factors is essential. What are the risk factors for prediabetes? You should be tested for prediabetes if you: Are overweight or obese Have a close relative (parent or sibling) who currently has or has had diabetes Have high blood pressure , low HDL (‘good’ cholesterol) or high triglycerides Are over the age of 40 Have given birth to a baby who weighed over 9 pounds While pre-diabetes may affect anyone, of any age, gender or racial type, some groups are genetically more prone. These include: Afro-Caribbean South Asian Native American Testing for prediabetes Either a fasting plasma glucose test or an HbA1c test may be used to diagnose type 2 diabetes or prediabetes. The following results indicate the presence of prediabetes: Fasting plasma glucose: 5.5 mmol/L to 6.9 mmol/L HbA1c: 42 to 47 mmol/mol (6.0 to 6.4%) [361] If your results are above the upper limits for prediabetes, your GP may either diagnose you with type 2 diabetes or take another test in the near future to confirm whether you have diabetes. If you have symptoms of diabetes but have an HbA1c of below 42 mmol/mol (6.0%), you may be given an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). If you are diagnosed with prediabetes, your doctor should clearly set out the steps you need to take to lower your risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Can I stop prediabetes developing into type 2 diabetes? The good news is that cases of prediabetes that are identified early on can be reversed, preventing them from progressing into full-blown type 2 diabetes. Each year in the UK, 5% to 10% of people diagnosed with prediabetes go on to develop type 2 diabetes. The two principle factors for consideration are: Making changes to your diet and Appropriate physical exercise to your lifestyle By making these changes, blood sugar levels can be returned to normal. In fact, the recently completed Diabetes Prevention Program study conclusively showed that people with borderline diabetes can prevent the development of type 2 diabetes by making dietary changes and increasing their level of physical activity. For a comprehensive and individual plan, speak to your doctor. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.