===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diet/ramadan-and-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Ramadan and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:46.784187",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Ramadan and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1153,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Ramadan and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? There is often discussion about whether people with diabetes should fast during Ramadan or not. Ramadan is a month long period of fasting during the daylight hours. Fasting during Ramadan is undertaken to promote chastity and humility and as an act of submission to Allah. Ramadan takes place on the 9th lunar month of the Islamic calendar. As a result, the date varies amongst the western (Gregorian) calendar. Is fasting with diabetes dangerous to health? Fasting during Ramadan could compromise one’s health. Those on blood glucose lowering medication should consult their GP about whether it will be safe for them to fast and what precautions can be taken to prevent blood glucose levels from going either too low or too high. Continuing to take blood glucose lowering medication during the daylight hours of fasting may present a particular risk of low blood glucose; hypoglycemia During the hours of night, when the day’s fast can be broke, the body may need to take in more food than would normally be eaten, as a result, this may lead to higher blood glucose levels during the night time hours. Should people with diabetes fast during Ramadan? People are recommended not to fast if the act of fasting could negatively affect their health. The charity, Diabetes UK , advises people with existing diabetic complications not to fast. People with type 1 diabetes should not stop taking their insulin as this could lead to a dangerous condition called diabetic ketoacidosis However, fasting whilst continuing to take insulin could lead to hypos so people with type 1 should seek the advice of their consultant or diabetologist before taking part in fasting. Other people which may be exempt from fasting include pregnant women, the elderly and those suffering an illness. Those who cannot fast during Ramadan may be expected to donate meals to the poor and needy. You may wish to speak with your Imam about how best to respect the fasting period. Be sure to check with you doctor if you take part in the fast. Controlling your blood sugar levels through Ramadan It is advisable to test your blood sugar levels more often than normal through Ramadan. Be aware of the symptoms of high and low blood sugar Have your testing kit ready if you notice you may be either too high or low on sugar. If you are taking blood glucose lowering medication, make sure you have a form of quickly absorbed sugar with you. See below for which foods are good options for eating at Iftar (the break of fasting). Foods to eat at Iftar (the fast-breaking meal) When the hours of daylight of over at dusk the fasting period is broken until dawn. It is important for people with diabetes to eat enough to keep nourished but to keep to healthy foods. Carbohydrates provide a lot of energy but can be less good for blood sugar levels, particularly for people with type 2 diabetes. Carbohydrates with a low glycaemic index such as brown rice, full grain bread and vegetables are better options than white rice, non-full grain bread or potatoes. Sweets may be popular dishes at Iftar but are not good for blood sugar levels. If you wish to consume sweets or ‘white carbohydrates’, it may be best to stick to much smaller portions of these. If your blood sugar levels become considerably raised as a result of these meals, it may be best not to continue with the fasting. Protein is a good source of energy and is more slowly absorbed than carbohydrate. People with signs of kidney damage should seek the advice of their doctor before significantly increasing the amount of protein they eat. Nuts, oily fish, avocados, olives and olive oil are excellent sources of energy and they help to increase your HDL (good cholesterol ). These options are a great way to get the energy you need whilst keeping your blood sugar levels under control. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Diet You may have heard about GLP-1 which is the hormone at the… 4 minute read