===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diet/low-calorie-diets.html",
  "title": "Low calorie diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:10.197145",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Low calorie diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1173,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Low calorie diet - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? A low calorie diet gives a target intake of calories each day. A low calorie diet, which may also be referred to as a calorie restricted diet, provides a steady way to achieve weight loss and is usually a key part of weight loss plans such as those used by slimming clubs. A low calorie diet is commonly advised for anyone people with diabetes that is overweight to some degree. What is a low calorie diet? The NHS defines a low calorie ( kcal ) diet of: Between 1,000 and 1,500 calories per day for women Between 1,500 and 2,000 calories per day for men The calorie target is designed to be less than the calories your body will expend (through organ functions and activity) through the day, therefore causing your body to break down body fat to cover the calorie short fall. Because of its broad definition, there can be many different types of low calorie diet. So, any low fat diet or any low carbohydrate diet, as examples, that meet the low calorie diet criteria would also be low calorie diets. Steady weight loss A low calorie can help you to lose weight at a steady level over an extended period of time and some weeks may produce less pronounced weight loss than other weeks. A low calorie diet is generally not designed to achieve rapid weight loss, but to achieve success over a longer period of time. A low calorie diet can therefore have long term success particularly if you are willing to accept it as part of your every day routine. Balanced diet It is important to aim for a balanced diet whilst following a low calorie diet to ensure you are not missing out on the right vitamins. Don’t fall into the trap of focusing too much on calorie counts and missing out on nutrients from important food groups such as fruit and vegetables as a result. Unless additional restrictions are applied, a low calorie diet will usually allow enough room for the intake of a good range of vitamins and minerals from a variety of food sources. A dietitian can help you to ensure that your diet is well balanced. Counting calories Packaged foods are required to include calorific information, however, in some cases you may need to weigh the food and/or use mathematics to figure out the calorie content of the portion you have. For non-packaged foods like fruits and vegetables, there are a good number of available sources of calorie counting tables which range from books to smartphone apps Full calorie counts are available at some restaurants whilst some restaurants may list which meals are less than a defined calorie value. If the calorie content is not provided, you may need to try to form a best estimate. Note that when we refer to calories, we are referring to kilocalories, often denoted as kcal Watch out for the other measurement of energy kilojoules ( kJ ). 1 kcal is equal to over 4 kJ so it is best not to mix these up. Always look for the energy value in kcal Book review: Carbs & Cals: A Visual Guide to Carbohydrate & Calorie Counting Exercise The NHS recommends that we take 2 and 1/2 hours of exercise a week. Exercise acts as a good compliment to a low calorie diet as it encourages the body to better metabolise the food we take in. When we exercise, we use a form glucose (glycogen) stored in our muscles as well as glucose from our blood. After exercising, these muscles will continue to take glucose from the blood to replenish their stores of glycogen. Therefore as well as supporting weight loss, exercise can also help to keep blood glucose levels down. Slimming clubs Many of the slimming clubs in the UK advocate low calorie diets to achieve steady and achievable weight loss. Slimming clubs will often provide meal plans and exercise targets in addition to offering social support and motivation from others taking part in the club. Read more on slimming clubs What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Diet You may have heard about GLP-1 which is the hormone at the… 4 minute read