===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diet/newcastle-study-600-calorie-diet",
  "title": "800 calorie shake diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:55.679945",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "800 calorie shake diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 947,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
800 calorie shake diet - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Extreme low-calorie diets, such as the 600 calorie diet studied by Newcastle University have been hailed as extremely effective in helping people with diabetes to control their blood glucose levels. In some instances, reports of temporary diabetes cures have been reported from following an extreme low-calorie diet for a short period. Is this the 600 calorie diet that was in the news? A Newcastle University study, funded by Diabetes UK , examined 11 people with diabetes who slashed their food intake to 600 calories per day for 8 weeks. Three months later, 7 of the 11 people studied were free of diabetes. As with other very low calorie diets , you should consult a doctor before undertaking such a diet. What was involved in the diet used in the study? The diet was predominantly based around: Optifast meal replacement sachets, which provided 75% of the calories (600 cals) The other 200 calories came from non-starchy vegetables. Note: The diet is referred to as the 600 calorie diet (rather than the 800 calorie diet) due to the meal replacement aspect of the diet totalling 600 calories. How does an extreme low-calorie diet affect the body? An extreme low-calorie diet (usually based on diet drinks and non-starchy vegetables) reportedly prompts the body to expel fat clogging the pancreas, helping people with type 2 diabetes to ‘wake up’ their insulin producing cells. So low-calorie diets bring blood glucose levels down? In the aforementioned study, people with diabetes who did not get the special diet were also assessed. After one week, those on the extreme low-calorie diet had pre-breakfast blood glucose levels close to normal This was in line with decreasing fat levels in the pancreas. So the study cured people of type 2 diabetes? The study showed marked improvements in blood sugar levels to the extent where the participants appeared to be cured. However, as is the case with pre-diabetes , those participants who benefitted the most from the study will still need to be disciplined with their diet and exercise to prevent or delay the return of diabetes symptoms. Were there any side effects of the diet? A number of side effects were observed in participants during the first few days of the diet, such as: Headaches Dizziness Hunger Tiredness Cold People involved in the study were advised to keep up their fluid intake and wrap up to keep warm. Since the initial study, a significant amount of research has been funded by Diabetes UK into the very low calorie approach, which has demonstrated that it can support remission of type 2 diabetes, even for people who are considered ‘skinny’ . ‘Game-changing’ study suggests type 2 remission possible even at lower body weight What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Diet You may have heard about GLP-1 which is the hormone at the… 4 minute read