===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes_care/Diabetes_and_low_calorie_sweeteners.html",
  "title": "Artificial sweeteners - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:04:26.261992",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Artificial sweeteners - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1227,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Artificial sweeteners - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 04 November 2022 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Use of sugar needn’t be outlawed for people who are diabetic, but keeping sugar intake to a minimum is certainly recommended. One way to reduce your sugar intake without sacrificing taste is by replacing table sugar (sucrose) with low calorie sweeteners, which can be beneficial for people who wish to enjoy certain foods without risking a spike in blood glucose levels as well as those who are overweight and wish to reduce their calorie intake. The charity, Diabetes UK , takes the approach that low-calorie artificial sweeteners can be included as part of the diabetic diet, as long as the food they are eaten with does not itself contain high fat or calorie content. Remember, a diabetic diet need not be 100% sugar free. Balance is the key. What is a low-calorie sweetener? Low-calorie sweeteners are sugar substitutes that have zero calories and do not raise blood glucose levels through eating them, which makes them a preferable choice for diabetic people over sugar. Low-cal sweeteners are neither carbohydrate, nor fat, and they don’t fit any of the other categories of the diabetic exchange Sweeteners can be added to a diabetic meal plan instead of exchanged. Explore low calorie sweeteners: Aspartame Lactitol Malitol Mannitol Saccharin Sorbitol Stevia Xylitol The sweeteners listed above can be found in a number of food and drink products, whilst some are also the main ingredient of the UK’s top 3 artificial sweetener brands: Canderel – which contains aspartame Splenda – which contains sucralose Sweetex – which contains saccharin One of the newest sweeteners on the market is 000 Stevia Sugar , which is a zero calorie, 100% natural sweetener that contains both Stevia and the sugar alcohol Erythritol. Types of low-calorie sweetener There are several varieties of low-calorie sweetener approved by the Food Standards Agency (FSA), the government body responsible for food safety and food hygiene across the UK. What types of artificial sweetener are suitable for diabetics? The following types of artificial sweetener are commercially available: Saccharin – Saccharin is often used in both hot and cold foods as an artificial sweetener. Sacchari, despite initial concerns over its carcinogenic affects, has been approved as a safe and effective sweetener. Aspartame – Aspartame is an artificial sweetener that can be better employed in cold foods. Depending on the type, higher temperatures can decrease its sweetening effects. Popular brands include NutraSweet and Equal. Aspartame has been in the media spotlight recently in regards to its safety. Acesulfame Potassium – Acesulfame potassium (also called acelsufame-K), is another type of low-calorie sweetener suitable for diabetes sufferers. The sweetener can be used in cooking because of its ability to resist heat. Sweet One and Swiss Sweet are both based around this sweetener. Sucralose – Sucralose is the most recent low-calorie sweetener around. The sweetener is not affected by heat and generally retains its sweetness in cooking or hot drinks. Splenda is based on Sucralose. How do I know these sweeteners are safe for diabetics to use? Low-calorie sweeteners have been extensively tested and reviewed but some debate as to safety does remain. In general, artificial sweeteners sold in the UK will have been approved for everyone, including pregnant women and children. People suffering from phenylketonuria are advised to avoid aspartame. What are the good and bad points when it comes to artificial sweeteners for diabetic people? Low-calorie sweeteners generally have fewer calories, and as such can be good for overweight people, often type 2 diabetics , who are trying to lose weight. However, it is worth being aware of what the food you are eating contains – foods that contain low-calorie sweeteners are not necessarily low-calorie themselves. To stay on top of this, always check the nutrition information on the food label. Sugar-free foods do not always mean low calorie, so be on your guard for this. Can I cook using low-calorie sweeteners? Some low-calorie sweeteners make excellent additions to sweeten your recipes, and this can be a major aid for the diabetic diet. However, cooking with sugar does add more to food than just the sweetness, particularly when it comes to cakes and biscuits. Some diabetics prefer to use both sugar and sweetener, but you should stay aware of how this affects blood sugar levels at all times. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Living with Diabetes Overeating is common, harms glucose control and it is fixable with straight… 6 minute read Living with Diabetes As the days grow shorter and darker in autumn and winter, many… 3 minute read