===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.org.uk/living-with-diabetes/eating/i-have-type-2-diabetes",
  "title": "Eating guide type 2",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 1,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-27T23:09:26.724944",
  "source_name": "diabetes.org.uk",
  "document_title": "Eating guide type 2",
  "fetch_method": "playwright_direct",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 2084,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Eating guide type 2

Page saved! You can go back to this later in your Diabetes and Me
Close

I have type 2 diabetes – what can I eat?

If you've just been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, one of your concerns might be whether you need to change your diet and cut out foods. Being diagnosed with type 2 diabetes can be daunting and overwhelming. As well as a new diagnosis, you might also feel like you’ve been given a list of things to do or stop doing. This could include attending several new medical appointments, taking new medication, being asked to stop smoking if you’re a smoker or making changes to your diet or physical activities routines. With so much to take in at once and all the myths about diabetes and food that you’ll probably hear, it can be hard to know what to do. Everybody's needs are different and we all have our favourite foods but we can help get you started with some healthy food options to try. “When I decided to make changes to my life, diet came first. I looked on the Diabetes UK website and read all about the food I needed to eat. It all looked simple – but to act on it and manage this new way of eating was difficult. I knew I had to do it.” Read Zahoor's story of living with type 2 diabetes . On this page: What’s the diabetes diet? Low carbohydrate diets Diabetes diet plans to lose weight Breakfast ideas when you have diabetes Lunch ideas when you have diabetes Dinner ideas when you have diabetes Can I eat fruit? Can I snack in-between meals? Get support to eat well What’s the diabetes diet? There is no such thing as a special diet exclusively for people with type 2 diabetes. No two people with diabetes are the same. So there isn’t a one-size-fits-all way of eating for everyone with diabetes. In the past, people with type 2 diabetes were sent away after their diagnosis with a list of foods they weren't allowed to eat. But our advice is to make healthier choices more often, and only have treats occasionally and in small portions . Because we know that making healthier food choices is important to manage your diabetes and to reduce your risk of diabetes complications, like heart problems and strokes , and other health conditions including certain types of cancers . It's best to avoid foods labelled ‘diabetic’ or ‘suitable for diabetics’, and eating too much red and processed meat or highly processed carbs like white bread, crisps, cakes and biscuits. Cutting down on these means you’re reducing your risk of certain cancers and heart diseases. Try and make changes to your food choices that are realistic and achievable so you’ll stick with them. This will be different for everyone, depending on what you eat now and the goals you want to achieve. Here are some examples of goals – think about yours and write them down if that helps: ‘I want to reach my target blood sugar level ’. ‘I want to reduce my cholesterol levels (blood fats)’. ‘I want good blood pressure ’ ‘I want to be a healthy weight ’ ‘I want to put my type 2 diabetes into remission ’. You’re more likely to achieve your goals if you get some support – whether that’s from your healthcare team, your family and friends or other people with diabetes. There are millions of people with type 2 diabetes wondering what they can eat – you’re not alone in this. Low carbohydrate diets Although there isn’t a one-size-fits-all diet, we know that some people with type 2 diabetes will have been recommended to try to eat a diet that is lower in carbohydrates . And some people have found a low or lower carb diet has helped them lose weight and manage their blood glucose levels. Carbohydrates can be grouped into those that contain mostly starch (such as bread, rice, pasta, potatoes, yams, plantain, breakfast cereals and couscous), and those that contain mostly sugars, such as fruits (fructose), some dairy foods (lactose), sweets, chocolate, sugary drinks and desserts.  Carbohydrates you eat and drink are broken down into glucose. The type, and amount, you consume can make a difference to your blood glucose levels and diabetes management. The total amount of carbohydrate you’ve had will have the biggest effect on your glucose levels after eating. It is important to stress everyone needs some carbohydrate-containing foods in their diet. For many of us, carbohydrates are a key source of energy. Carbohydrate-containing foods also provide important nutrients for good health. The actual amount that you need to eat will depend on your age, activity levels, and the health goal you are trying to achieve. More importantly for overall health, choosing foods that are high in fibre and wholegrains instead of refined carbs, such as white bread, is better for our heart health and reducing our risk of certain types of cancers. We also know that some specific carb-containing foods, such as fruits and vegetables and dairy, are associated with good health. Eating a low-carb diet means cutting down on the amount of carbohydrates you eat to less than 130g a day. But low-carb eating shouldn’t be no-carb eating. Our low-carb meal plan aims to help you maintain a healthy balance while reducing the amount of carbs you eat. Varying amounts of carbohydrate are shown each day to help you choose which works best for you. It's nutritionally balanced, we’ve counted the calories for you, and it contains at least five portions of fruit and veg per day. If you’re taking diabetes medications that put you at risk of low blood sugar, or hypos , checking your blood glucose levels regularly and speaking to your healthcare team to review your medications will help to reduce your risk of hypos when you restrict your carb intake. Diabetes diet plans to lose weight If you’re overweight, finding a way to lose weight has huge benefits. It can help you manage your blood sugar , blood pressure and cholesterol levels. And there’s strong evidence to suggest that losing extra weight can put your type 2 diabetes into remission . We know this is more likely nearer to you being diagnosed, so find out everything you can about remission and speak to your healthcare team about it. There are different ways to lose weight, like a low-carb diet , Mediterranean diet and very low-calorie diets. Get our guide to losing weight – we’ve put together some meal plans to help you. But speak to your healthcare team too, they can refer you to a dietitian for more specific advice and help you stick to your plan. We haven't created low- or very low-calorie meal plans as these could be challenging using foods. Most people who follow these diets use special meal replacement products which are nutritionally complete. If you chose to try a low-calorie diet, speak to your GP or nurse first, especially if you use medication like insulin. Download your weight-loss planner "I keep a daily diary and log my weight and activity. It keeps me accountable and focused." Edward Morrison, who lost over four stone – read his story . You can download My weight-loss planner (PDF, 534KB) to set goals and track your progress. By putting a plan in place and noting down your progress, you'll be able to see the positive changes you're making. Learn food hacks Get practical tools and tailored advice on what to eat when you have type 2 diabetes – all in our Learning Zone .

Breakfast ideas when you have diabetes Diabetes won’t stop you from enjoying your food, but knowing some simple hacks and swaps will help you choose healthier options and make planning your meals a little easier. These ideas may not look much different from what you eat already, and your favourite recipes and meals can usually be adapted to be healthier without you noticing too much difference. Here are some healthy breakfast ideas to choose from: a bowl of wholegrain cereal with milk two slices of wholegrain toast with olive oil-based spread a pot of natural unsweetened yogurt and fruit two slices of avocado with a hardboiled egg. You could also try our recipe for breakfast eggs with avocado and black beans . Lunch ideas when you have diabetes Here are some healthy lunch ideas to choose from: a chicken or tuna salad sandwich plenty of salad or mixed with cooled, cooked pasta. soup with or without a wholegrain roll mackerel and salad chicken, tofu or bean stir fry and vegetables with or without brown rice. Think about having a piece of fruit or a pot of natural unsweetened yogurt afterwards too. Dinner ideas when you have diabetes Here are some healthy dinner ideas to choose from: omelette and salad with or without potatoes roast chicken or baked fish and vegetables, with or without potatoes. beef stir-fry and vegetables, with or without brown rice chicken tortillas and salad salmon and vegetables, with or without noodles curry with chickpeas and brown rice. Get more recipes here for breakfast, lunch and dinner – you can search by type of meal and ingredient. Can I eat fruit? Yes, whole fruit is good for everyone and if you have diabetes, it's no different. You might think that the sugar content of fruit, and some vegetables, means that you can’t eat them. But the sugar in whole fruit and veg does not count towards free sugars; the type of sugar we need to cut down on. This is different to the free sugar in sugary drinks, chocolate, cakes and biscuits, as well as in all fruit and vegetable juices, smoothies and honey. Still not sure which foods mean you’re making healthy choices? Read our 10 top tips for healthy eating when you have diabetes – it takes you through the foods that are healthier than others, including which carbohydrates are the better choice and how to be smart with snacks. Can I snack in-between meals? Some people with type 2 diabetes hear about hypos (when your blood sugar gets too low) and think they need to eat snacks to avoid them. But this isn’t the case for everyone. You don’t need to eat snacks if you’re not taking any medication for your type 2 diabetes. If you treat your diabetes with medication that puts you at risk of hypos, like insulin, you may need a snack to prevent a hypo. But if you find you’re having to snack a lot to prevent hypos, talk to your healthcare team so they can give you more advice. Snacking in general can make it harder to manage a healthy weight though, which is really important for managing your diabetes. So if you do feel like a snack, go for a healthier option like unsalted nuts or seeds, carrot or cucumber sticks and hummus. We’ve got lots of simple snack swaps to try. Get support to eat well Get support from your healthcare team, and talk to family and friends about how you’re feeling and what they can do to help. If you usually do the cooking at home or someone cooks for you, it can help to read this information together and talk about small swaps and changes you can make in the kitchen. Go on a structured education course Being diagnosed with type 2 diabetes can often feel like there’s a lot to learn. But going on a course can help you understand what diabetes is and how food affects your body. Ask your healthcare team about getting on a structured education course near you or find out more in our education information . Join Learning Zone Learning Zone is our online education service to help people with diabetes understand and manage their condition successfully. We’ve made a section all about food hacks to help you learn how to make those simple swaps – log into Learning Zone . Chat about food in our online forum Our support forum has over 18,000 members. It’s a place to have a chat with someone else who has type 2 diabetes, ask questions about food, or just read other people’s posts to see what diets are working for them. We’ve got dedicated boards for people talking about food, recipes and weight loss. Call our helpline Our helpline is free and our trained counsellors get hundreds of calls about food every week.

Next Review Date