===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/foods-to-avoid-with-diabetes",
  "title": "Foods to avoid with diabetes",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 3,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-27T23:10:11.321531",
  "source_name": "healthline.com",
  "document_title": "Foods to avoid with diabetes",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<article>",
  "word_count": 1097,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Foods to avoid with diabetes

People with prediabetes or diabetes can choose certain foods or drinks that may be better when managing the condition. Moderation and understanding how different foods and ingredients may affect your blood sugar levels are key. The foods and drinks you consume can help keep your blood glucose levels in the target range your healthcare team recommends. Read on to learn about five types of foods and drinks you can eat while living with prediabetes or diabetes , as well as five you may want to avoid. What foods are worse for diabetes and prediabetes? Certain foods and drinks can raise blood glucose and insulin levels and promote inflammation. These effects can increase your chance of developing prediabetes or diabetes. And these conditions can increase your chance of developing other chronic health problems, including heart disease. Limiting certain foods and drinks may help you manage your condition and reduce your chance of such complications. These foods include: Foods with added sugars Limiting added sugars can help keep your blood glucose levels in the target range. Examples include baked goods such as cakes, cookies, and pies. The American Heart Association recommends limiting added sugar consumption to: 25 grams (6 teaspoons) per day for women 36 grams (9 teaspoons) per day for men Sugar-sweetened beverages Sweetened drinks offer little nutrients but still have a lot of added sugar. These may include sodas, flavored coffee drinks, energy drinks , fruit punch, lemonade (and other “-ades”), and some mixed drinks . Limiting these may help lower your glucose levels, blood fat , and chance of developing fatty liver disease . Foods with saturated fats Consuming saturated fats can increase your cholesterol levels and your chance of heart disease. The American Diabetes Association recommends ensuring that no more than 10% of your daily calories come from saturated fats. Some foods containing saturated fats are high fat meat and dairy products, poultry skin, and oils such as palm and coconut. Alcohol If you have diabetes, you may want to limit or avoid alcohol consumption, as it may affect your liver’s ability to release glucose. Alcohol may also interfere with certain diabetes medications, such as Metformin . Further, some drinks, such as certain cocktails, can contain a large amount of sugar. Talk with your doctor about your alcohol consumption. They will be able to tell you if it interferes with your medications and, if not, how much is safe for you to drink. Ultra-processed foods This category includes foods high in added sugars, refined grains, unhealthy fats, preservatives, and salt. Ultra-processed foods also contain ingredients you would not add to your food, such as high fructose corn syrup. Eating these foods significantly increases the chance of developing type 2 diabetes. What are the best foods for diabetes and prediabetes? Some foods are particularly healthy if you’re living with prediabetes or diabetes: Fiber-rich foods Consuming enough fiber can help you stay full longer and avoid the fatigue that comes from eating sugary foods. Many fiber-rich foods also have a low glycemic index (GI) . Examples include non-starchy vegetables, whole grains, and legumes. Protein-rich foods Eating lean protein can help fill you up. You can eat all lean meats — including lean beef, pork, and poultry — as well as fish and plant protein sources. Try to limit or avoid red and processed meat. These types of meat are linked to a higher risk of developing diabetes, as well as cardiovascular disease and certain types of cancer. Fruits Fruits provide many important vitamins and minerals along with antioxidants and fiber. They’re a source of carbohydrates, but all fruits have a low to medium GI and can be part of your healthy eating plan. Healthy fats Your body does need fat, so it’s essential to include these in your diet. Olive oil and avocado are examples of healthy fat sources. They will also help you feel satiated. Foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids, like salmon, can also decrease fasting blood sugar, triglycerides , and LDL (bad) cholesterol . Unsweetened drinks You don’t have to stick to water if you have prediabetes or diabetes. You can drink tea or coffee if it doesn’t contain sugar. Coffee has been linked to several health benefits, including a reduced risk of diabetes. Opt for plain coffee, espresso, or a low sugar flavoring to help keep your glucose levels within the target range and prevent weight gain. You can also drink flavored, unsweetened sparkling waters or sugar-free beverages. The foods you can eat may vary based on whether you have prediabetes , type 1 diabetes , or type 2 diabetes . Your metabolism may also play a role, so it’s a good idea to speak with a healthcare professional or a registered dietitian about your best eating plan. Why do carbohydrates matter for people with diabetes? Carbohydrates, protein , and fat are the macronutrients that provide your body with energy and support it in carrying out essential functions. Carbohydrates, in particular, are your body’s primary fuel source . Carbohydrates come in multiple forms, including starches, sugars , and fiber . All carbohydrates except fiber are broken down into glucose in your body. Insulin , a hormone produced by your pancreas , helps transport glucose from your bloodstream to your body’s cells, where the glucose can be used for energy. However, when you have type 2 diabetes, which makes up 90% to 95% of diabetes cases, your body cannot efficiently remove glucose from your bloodstream. This leads to high blood glucose levels. High blood glucose levels cause your pancreas to make more insulin. Over time, your pancreas may wear out and produce little insulin. If you have diabetes, it is advisable to pay close attention to what you eat—especially the types and number of carbohydrates you include—to help manage your blood glucose levels. Doing so will also prevent sharp increases and decreases in your blood glucose level and reduce your risk of long-term complications. The takeaway Having prediabetes or diabetes does not necessarily mean you need to entirely avoid certain foods or food groups. But consuming less of certain types of food may help support healthy blood glucose levels and reduce your risk of other chronic health conditions. Avoid foods with added sugars, sugar-sweetened beverages, and ultra-processed foods. Instead, try to eat foods rich in fiber and protein, like non-starchy vegetables and poultry. If you need support related to your condition, you can contact a healthcare professional, your family, and your social network. In addition, Healthline’s Bezzy T2D can connect you with other people living with type 2 diabetes. Read this article in Spanish.