===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/food/low-carb-lunch.html",
  "title": "Lunch ideas - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:41.866484",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Lunch ideas - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 963,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Lunch ideas - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Amar Singh Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Low carb lunch ideas that are fast, healthy and easy to prepare at the office or home. Make your lunch minimally disturbing of your blood glucose control Whilst not everyone with diabetes chooses to follow a low carb diet, and a variety of diet options do exist, there is no doubt that restricting carbs helps a lot of people with diabetes to control their blood sugar. The following low carb ideas are details some of the foods you could eat for lunch. Tuna & Seafood Tuna makes a wonderful, inexpensive and healthy low-carb lunch. There are a variety of ways to make tuna more delicious, such as adding extra virgin oil, vinegar, capers or spices. Other seafood such as shrimp and salmon really add diversity to your diet Meat Sliced deli meats such as chicken, turkey and roast beef are low-carb and really tasty. Wrapping meat around fresh sliced cheese, adding in mayo or mustard, creates a really tasty low-carb lunchtime snack Ideal with olives. Furthermore, cheeseburgers, hamburgers and chicken burgers may all be eaten as part of a low-carb lunch. However, always be sure to remove the bread or bun to make it low carb. Vegetables and salad Vegetables such as peppers, celery, cucumber, broccoli and carrots can be combined with a (low carb) dipping sauce for an incredible rewarding snack. Although salads may feel really boring, on a low-carb diet it’s possible to add in whichever veggies strike your mood as well as meat such as chicke, steak or ham. Olives and cheese, with capers, oil and vinegar really make a difference. Eggs Adding hard boiled eggs to your salad makes a great low-carb alternative to mopping up sauce with bread. You can cook eggs in numerous ways and even eat them as a snack, let your imagination run riot. Low carb soup Many soup recipes are low-carb lunchtime snacks, and are quickly and easily prepared for when you need to eat. Top tips for low-carb lunches Other than just the food itself, there are other ways you can spice up your lunch. Leftovers Leftovers make a real difference when you are eating fresh. A lot of foods you cook will taste even better the next day. Bringing delicious treats into your office is a sure way to win favour with your colleagues and avoid rushed, fast-food lunches. Variety Variety is the key – try regular recipe combinations and avoid getting bored with your low-carb lunches. Do some internet research, there are plenty of low-carb lunchtime recipes out there. Drink water Drink lots and lots of water to stay healthy. Water helps to drain your system of toxins, so drink regularly to flush yourself out. Mix it up! Get out more, mix it up. Food eaten in the same location (at your desk) can be a rush job that starts to feel stale. Go out more, find beautiful places to eat, enjoy any good weather. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.