===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diet/mediterranean-diet.html",
  "title": "Mediterranean diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:16.301745",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Mediterranean diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1150,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Mediterranean diet - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 10 August 2022 Updated on 13 May 2024 Author Editor Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Mediterranean diets rich in fruit and vegetables are known to be healthy for people with diabetes. As well as being protective against type 2 diabetes , Mediterranean diets rich in fruit, vegetables and fibre can help people with diabetes to control their blood sugar levels. Where does the Mediterranean diet come from? The Mediterranean diet is thought to have originated in Crete, Southern Italy and Greece. Previous large-scale studies have linked a Mediterranean diet with a lower chance of developing diabetes. What is in a Mediterranean diet? A traditional Mediterranean diet is principally composed of: Oily fish Poultry Fresh fruit and vegetables Legumes Fresh bread Pasta Olive oil One of the reasons why Mediterranean diets are healthy is that they include a strong vegetable content. Vegetables such as tomatoes, peppers, aubergines, olives, onions, rocket and lettuce are not only great for blood glucose levels but make for very visually appealing meals too. Most people should be able to include a moderate amount of fruit. If you are susceptible to sharp spikes in blood glucose levels opt for lower carb fruits such as berries. A Mediterranean diet typically includes a good intake of fat from a diverse set of foods including feta and mozzarella cheeses, yoghurt, olive oil, avocado, oily fish and nuts. Beans nuts, seeds, eggs, poultry and a moderate amount of red meat provide protein. Pasta and bread, which would ideally be freshly made, provide carbohydrate in addition to starchy vegetables . Not everyone with diabetes can handle starchy foods as well as others so stick to portion sizes that won’t greatly raise your sugar levels. You do not need to stick to just having Mediterranean dishes but should embrace the spirit of the diet which is to focus on fresh rather than processed foods . Why is the Mediterranean diet recommended? The diet is often recommended by health charities and the NHS because it has a higher proportion of unsaturated to saturated fats, includes plenty of fresh vegetables and depends on largely unprocessed foods. The diet is not a restrictive diet and so it is not linked with vitamin or mineral deficiencies and therefore gets further praise as an easy diet to adopt and follow. What are the health benefits of the Mediterranean diet? The Mediterranean diet has been show, particularly in combination with regular exercise , to promote good heart health and is associated with a lower risk of developing type 2 diabetes and cancer. Mediterranean meal plan If you’re looking to start a Mediterranean diet, download our free meal plan to get you started. Each day is filled with delicious, nutritionist-approved recipes complete with full nutritional breakdowns and vibrant photos. Download the 7 Day Mediterranean Diet Meal Plan To access the meal plan, you require a free Diabetes.co.uk account. Which large studies have tested the relationship between the Mediterranean diet and diabetes? A study involving 14,000 Spanish people scored people on factors within the Mediterranean diet. The participants were ranked into three groups, each of which was found to have a different risk of diabetes . However, the study was criticised for the group being too young and more rigorous studies were advised. That said, a number of studies have recently shown the benefits of a Mediterranean diet: Mediterranean diet helps symptoms of depression in young men new research finds Mediterranean diet can help improve sleep quality Adopting a Mediterranean diet improves fertility, evidence suggests Mediterranean lifestyle reduces cancer mortality risk Mediterranean lifestyle lowers risks of premature death and cancer Mediterranean diet and keeping active could reduce risk of hospital-associated disability in older people The Mediterranean diet stands out as a sustainable and beneficial approach to eating. Whether you’re looking to reduce your risk of chronic diseases, manage your weight, or simply enjoy a healthier lifestyle, the Mediterranean diet may just be the right choice for you. As always, speak to your doctor before making any significant changes to your diet. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Diet You may have heard about GLP-1 which is the hormone at the… 4 minute read