===METADATA===
{
  "source_name": "cdc_diabetes_basics",
  "document_title": "CDC Diabetes Basics",
  "url": "https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/hcp/employers/index.html",
  "parent_url": "https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/about/index.html",
  "page_index": 13,
  "category": "general",
  "language": "en",
  "source_type": "government_health",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "verified_by_doctor": true,
  "published_date": "",
  "condition_tags": [
    "diabetes"
  ],
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-05T17:09:49.569416",
  "char_count": 4800
}
===CONTENT===
Employers and Insurers
May 15, 2024
At a glance
Supporting type 2 diabetes prevention and diabetes management is a smart move for employers and insurers.
Employers
Diabetes in the workplace
People with diabetes live with the condition all day, every day, including at work. They may face unique challenges at the workplace, but they can overcome these challenges with the help of an informed employer.
You can maximize the health and productivity of your workers with diabetes by being more aware of common concerns in the workplace. Those concerns can include accommodations for people with diabetes and shift work.
Small adjustments to the work environment or schedule can:
Reduce absenteeism and presenteeism (when an employee goes to work despite a medical illness that prevents full functioning).
Increase productivity, concentration, and energy levels.
Reduce the chance of on-the-job injury.
Help you stay in compliance with the law.
These resources provide more information and guidance:
Diabetes and employment
Type 2 diabetes prevention for employers and insurers
Frequently asked questions about EEOC and diabetes in the workplace
Addressing diabetes is good business
Diabetes is costly. Helping your employees prevent type 2 diabetes and manage their diabetes can help them be healthier and more productive. It can also lower health care costs for them and for your business. Smart employers know there's a strong business case for helping employees with diabetes stay healthier.
Diabetes costs
Indirect costs:
$305 billion
, including:
Lost productivity due to morbidity:
$157 billion
Lost productivity due to premature deaths attributed to diabetes:
$148 billion
Direct costs:
$335 billion
, including hospitalization, medical care, treatment and supplies, and other costs.
Total costs: $640 billion
Source:
Economic
Costs Attributed to Diagnosed Diabetes in Each U.S. State and the District of Columbia: 2021
These resources provide more detail:
Moving the Needle on Diabetes: The Employer's Perspective
The return on investment of preventing type 2 diabetes with the National Diabetes Prevention Program (National DPP)
Help employees with diabetes or at risk for type 2 diabetes
You can help your employees be healthier, stay productive, and control medical costs by reducing their risk for type 2 diabetes and diabetes-related complications.
Learn more about two evidence-based interventions and recommend them to your employees:
National DPP
lifestyle change program for people at risk for type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes self-management education and support (DSMES) services
for people diagnosed with diabetes.
You can select benefits programs that cover enrollment in these two effective interventions.
Read about how employers can become involved in the
National DPP
. Use this
toolkit
for guidance in covering the National DPP.
Make it easier for employees to participate in DSMES or the National DPP lifestyle change program through flexible scheduling or by offering those services on site. Make changes that can help people with diabetes maintain healthy blood sugar levels. For example, provide healthier choices in vending machines and cafeterias
Insurers
Preventing type 2 diabetes
Diabetes and prediabetes affect the health and quality of life of millions of Americans in the workforce. These conditions also cost employers and insurers billions of dollars each year in lost productivity and medical expenses.
The National DPP lifestyle change program is proven to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes in adults with prediabetes.
Learn about this evidence-based program
Find out
how insurers can participate
in the National DPP.
National DPP Coverage Toolkit
explains how to offer the National DPP lifestyle change program as a covered benefit for beneficiaries, members, or employees at high risk for type 2 diabetes.
Managing diabetes
DSMES helps people manage diabetes by teaching practical skills and personalized strategies to improve their health. DSMES can lead to lower A1C levels, fewer diabetes complications, and lower costs.
Preventing or delaying diabetes complications also saves money for insurers.
Learn more from these resources:
DSMES for health care providers
explains when and how people with diabetes can benefit from participating.
Diabetes Self-management Education and Support in Adults With Type 2 Diabetes
report outlines the benefits of DSMES. It also defines four critical times to deliver DSMES and discusses potential ways to overcome access and use barriers.
DSMES Toolkit
is a comprehensive collection of resources for promoting, implementing, and supporting DSMES. Learn about DSMES coverage, reimbursement, and benefits.
May 15, 2024
Sources
Print
Share
Content Source:
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
Diabetes