===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-footcare.html",
  "title": "Looking after your feet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "complication/foot_care",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:14:06.560631",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Looking after your feet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 747,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Looking after your feet - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Foot care amongst diabetics is incredibly important as foot related complications are more common for those of us with diabetes. Foot ulcers for example, which affect as many as 1 out of 10 people with diabetes, can all to easily develop from blisters and small wounds to posing a threat of amputation. Even small ulcers on the foot can represent a serious risk: they may heal extremely slowly and need rigorous treatment to cure. Ulcers can develop into serious lower body infections, with the possibility of amputation at an advanced stage. Caring for your feet Caring for your feet as a diabetic should not be difficult, and should be a prime consideration. This section details complications that may affect the diabetic foot, and some methods and information about care. Why is foot care important? The presence of high blood glucose levels over a long period of time may result in a condition called diabetic neuropathy (damage to the nerves) or loss of circulation in the extremities of the body. If the nerves in your feet or legs are damaged, your feet can lose sensation and become numb. It is relatively common for people with diabetes to not feel foot problems until they have developed, therefore it is key to ensure you have regular foot examinations Diabetic foot complications include: Foot ulcers – open wounds on the foot Charcot foot – deformation of the foot Amputation Caring for your feet Foot care involves reducing damage from occurring to your feet and regularly checking your feet for any signs of damage. Damage to your feet can be reduced by avoiding walking barefoot, wearing correctly fitting footwear and keeping your feet clean and in good condition. Check your feet every day for any signs of damage. Checking your feet You should regularly examine your own feet for signs of damage. This is all the more important if you are suffering from poor circulation and numbness. If you have trouble checking your own feet, you may need to ask someone to help you check them. Look out for any of the following signs of foot damage: Cuts Bruising Swelling Grazes Sores Changes in colour Ulceration Hard skin Also be aware of any cracking from dry skin as this could develop into an ulcer over time. Foot examinations on the NHS It is important that you receive a regular check-up from a health professional at least once each year. If you have signs of neuropathy and/or poor blood circulation, you may need to have a foot examination more often. At a foot examination, your feet will be checked for: Signs of neuropathy or development of neuropathy Blood circulation Any signs of damage Read more on foot examinations Manage your diabetes Controlling your diabetes with an appropriate treatment regimen, healthy diet and lifestyle, and regular exercise will help to reduce the chances of suffering from foot complications. Products for the diabetic foot Several companies make specific products for the diabetic foot.  Calluses must be removed regularly by a podiatrist or other specialist. The wound should be cleaned and dressed, protected by the bandage but allowed to breathe. In more severe cases, it may be necessary to wear an orthowedge: a special shoe designed to alleviate pressure on the front of the foot. Further treatment may include the application of a contact cast, heavily padded inside to reduce pressure on the foot. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.