===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-complications/diabetic-foot-ulcers.html",
  "title": "Foot ulcers - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "complication/foot_care",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:14:11.792610",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Foot ulcers - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 674,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Foot ulcers - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Closely linked with diabetes neuropathy , diabetic nerve pain and diabetes foot care, diabetic foot ulcers affect many people with diabetes. Experts suggest that around 10 per cent of people with diabetes develop a foot ulcer at some point. Foot ulcers can affect people with both type 1 and type 2 diabetes Diabetes influences foot ulcers in a number of ways, and it is important for people with diabetes to understand the potentially severe consequences of leaving a foot ulcer untreated. What is a diabetic foot ulcer? Foot ulcers can occur in anyone, and refer to a patch of broken down skin usually on the lower leg or feet. When blood sugar levels are high or fluctuate regularly skin that would normally heal may not properly repair itself because of nerve damage. Even a mild injury can therefore start a foot ulcer. Why are people with diabetes more likely to get foot ulcers? People with diabetes may have reduced nerve functioning due to peripheral diabetic neuropathy . This means that the nerves that usually carry pain sensation to the brain from the feet do not function as well and it is possible for damage to uccur to your foot without feeling it. Treading on something, wearing tight shoes, cuts, blisters and bruises can all develop into diabetes foot ulcers. Narrowed arteries can also reduce blood flow to the feet amongst some people with diabetes and this can impair the foot’s ability to heal properly. When the foot cannot heal, a foot ulcer can develop. What are the risk factors for diabetes foot ulcers? The following can increase the likelihood of developing a foot ulcer: Neuropathy Poor blood circulation Insufficiently well controlled diabetes Wearing poor fitting footwear Walking barefoot People who have diabetes for a longer period or manage their diabetes less effectively are more likely to develop foot ulcers. Smoking , not taking exercise , being overweight , having high cholesterol or blood pressure can all increase diabetes foot ulcer risk. How serious are foot ulcers? Unfortunately, for some people with diabetes, the end result of a foot ulcer can be amputation . Less serious foot ulcers can still take a long time to heal and be very uncomfortable during this time. How can I avoid diabetes foot ulcers? Avoiding diabetes foot ulcers is a matter of taking good care of the feet (see the Diabetes and Footcare guide). Furthermore, people with diabetes should have their feet checked at least once a year by a doctor or healthcare professional. Recognising symptoms such as reduced feeling and acting on them immediately should help to avoid diabetes foot ulcers. I have diabetes and I am worried that I have a foot ulcer, what should I do? People with diabetes who are concerned that they may have a foot ulcer should speak to a doctor or podiatrist at once. These professionals should dress and protect the ulcer to avoid infection and help the skin heal. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.