===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/food/processed-foods.html",
  "title": "Processed foods - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:05:01.446050",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Processed foods - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1263,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Processed foods - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 02 May 2025 Author Mike Watts Tags food , health , processed food Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? As the name suggests, processed food is food which has undergone some form of processing to turn raw ingredients into a food product. Processing includes the preparation of food (washing, cutting, cooking, freezing, canning), killing bacteria (e.g. pasteurisation), the addition of additives and hydrogenation of ingredients. Tinned vegetables, pasteurised milk, and freshly baked bread are examples of processed foods. Are processed foods bad for our health? There is a lot of debate about just how bad processed foods are for us. The general consensus is that the less processed food is the better. Many foods fall into the category of processed foods and some have fallen under scrutiny more than others. A processed food is not necessarily bad as not all processes make food unhealthy. The processing in of vegetable oils is one that has been a hot topic recently, with claims that refined oils may be responsible for inflammatory conditions such as type 2 diabetes. Processed foods fall into two categories: processed, and ultra-processed. What are ultra processed foods? Ultra-processed foods have been through various processes and have numerous extra ingredients. Ultra-processed foods typically include additives such as artificial flavours, colours, sugar, and sweeteners . Ultra-processed foods are usually nutrient-light, but high in calories, sugar , salt, and harmful fats. Breakfast cereals, soda, packaged snacks such as crisps, and fast food meals are examples of ultra-processed foods. What are the benefits of processed food? Preserving food by preventing bacterial growth and allowing food to be stored for longer Improving the taste of food Improving the appearance It should go without saying that the primary benefit of processed foods is to the food manufacturers and distributors, in that it has allowed them greater maximise profits by increasing satisfaction and shelf life. What are the disadvantages of processed and ultra-processed food? There are a few reasons to avoid processed foods, such as: Loss of vitamins – e.g. canned vegetables Reduced amount of fibre – particularly in white breads, white pastas and white rice Highly processed foods tend to be digested more quickly which can be particularly disadvantageous for people with type 2 diabetes The main disadvantages though appear to be of ultra-processed foods towards the health of consumers. Ultra-processed foods and their link with poor long term health Rsearch has long established a link between consumption of ultra-processed foods and health. Ultra processed foods have been linked to a variety of conditions: Ultra-processed foods potentially linked to early death High intake of ultra-processed foods associated with lower grades in school Weight gain associated with high intake of ultra-processed foods Processed meat Processed meats have been consistently linked with a number of cancers. The amount of salt used, the poor quality of the meat as well as the number of additives that are used in the meat are all possible reasons for the link between processed meat and poor health. High intake of red meat linked with cognitive decline High intake of processed meat increases risk of type 2 diabetes Too much nitrite-cured meat increases cancer risk say scientists Trans fats Trans fats have been banned in a number of countries but are currently still tolerated by the UK. Refined oils Refined oils are treated with heat, and often chemicals, and are thought by some to be harmful for the body. Vegetable fats Vegetables fats can be assumed to be the by-product of this process. Vegetables oils within ingredients can also be assumed to be refined oils. Emulsifiers and hydrogenated ingredients are used to keep foods together and improve the texture. They haven’t generally received as much bad press as the above ingredients but the health conscious may wish to limit exposure to these. Preservatives and antioxidants generally need to be tested for toxicology before they can be regarded as safe for use in food. These tests are typically short term and are never performed on humans. Whether the levels permitted in food really are safe over a long term period is one of the many food health debates that persist today. Which ultra-processed foods should I avoid? As a general rule, make a habit of avoiding foods with a relatively high number of difficult to recognise ingredients. Contrary to their supposed aim, certain foods with reduced fat or salt content may be bolstered with additives that may be worse for us to consume. Typical foods that are identified as ones to generally avoid include: Cheap supermarket meats Hotdogs Ready meals Fast food White bread, white pasta, white rice Cakes, biscuits, buns, pastries Margarines The list is not exhaustive bit covers some of the main culprits, including some of those we’ve been lead to believe are healthy for us (margarines for example). What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.