===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diet/fasting-and-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Fasting and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:59.044817",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Fasting and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1092,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Fasting and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Amar Singh Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Periods of fasting are undertaken by a number of religions. Fasting with diabetes requires careful diabetes management. The reasons for fasting can vary as can the durations and the conditions of the fasting. For reasons of health, people with diabetes may often be exempt from having to observe the fasting, or may be allowed more leeway in how they complete the fast. Should I fast if I have diabetes? It is best to fast only if you can be sure that the fasting will not cause any difficulties with your diabetes and your health. Religions will generally excuse people from fasting if the abstinence from nutrition could cause harm. People with complications of diabetes, such as eye problems, kidney damage or heart trouble are advised not to fast. Children, the elderly, pregnant women and people going through illness or disability may also commonly be exempt from taking part. Diabetes treatment during fasting Diabetes medication doses may need to be altered during a fast so it is important to check with your doctor before you begin the fast. During the fasting periods, low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) is a potential issue and can be dangerous. The other potential for danger or difficulty is in the breaking of the fast. When hungry, it may be more difficult to control which food you take in. If sweet foods or larger amounts of carbohydrate are eaten than would normally be, then this could push blood sugar levels too high Diet around periods of fasting The way fasting is observed can vary between different religions. The length of time can vary quite significantly and some fasts may involve the eating of certain foods. If you are in doubt about the dietary aspect of the fast, arrange to speak with a dietitian. Fasting and Islam Ramadan is period of fasting which lasts for a lunar month. During Ramada, fasting is observed during the hours of sunlight. Although fasting during Ramadan is generally considered Fard (compulsory), people with diabetes may be exempt from having to fast if the act of fasting presents a danger to health. Being a month long, Ramadan is a long period of fasting so anyone with diabetes who takes part in the fasting is advised to speak with a doctor to discuss both diet and treatment during the fasting period. Read more on Diabetes during Ramadan Fasting and Judaism A number of fasting days are observed in the Jewish faith. The most prominent day of fasting is Yom Kippur, known as The Day of Atonement and the holiest day of the Jewish calendar. The period of fasting on this day starts 20 minutes before nightfall on the evening before Yom Kippur and is broken after nightfall on the following day. Given the medical implications of fasting for over 24 hours, people with diabetes may be permitted not to take part in the fasting. Yom Kippur takes place on the 10th day of the Jeiwsh month of Tishrei and therefore the date in the Gregorian calendar varies from year to year. Other days of fasting which may be observed include Fast of Gedalia (Tzom Gedalia), Tenth of Tevet (Asara B’Tevet), Seventeenth of Tamuz (Tzom Tamuz). Fasting and Christianity Whilst less widely observed in the Anglican faith, fasting may take place on specific days or people may decide to undertake fats on a voluntary basis. The Day of Atonement is one such day. Partial fasts may be undertaken by some. Examples of partial fasts include the Daniel fast which is the undertaking of a diet of vegetables, fruit and water. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Diet You may have heard about GLP-1 which is the hormone at the… 4 minute read