===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/sweeteners/sugar-alcohols.html",
  "title": "Sugar alcohols - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:57.731552",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Sugar alcohols - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 912,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Sugar alcohols - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Sugar alcohols are a type of carbohydrate known as polyols that are commonly used in place of table sugar (sucrose) to sweeten food and drink products. The title ‘sugar alcohols’ is a bit misleading as these substances don’t actually contain any sugar or alcohol – the name is derived from their chemical structure, part of which resembles sugar and part of which is similar to alcohol. Where do they come from? Some sugar alcohols are extracted from plants (e.g. sorbitol from corn syrup and mannitol from seaweed), but the majority are manufactured from sugars and starches. What are the benefits of using sugar alcohols? Unlike sugar, sugar alcohols are not completely absorbed into the blood stream from the small intestines. As a result, the have less of an impact on blood glucose than regular sugar (sucrose) and provide fewer calories per gram, making them popular sweeteners among diabetics and people on low-carb diets. In addition, sugar alcohols do not contribute to tooth decay, so are often added as a sweetener to chewing gum. In fact, one sugar alcohol ( xylitol ) actually inhibits bacterial growth in the mouth. Can they affect your health? Like many other incompletely digestible substances, sugar alcohols can ferment in the intestines and cause gas, or diarrhoea, especially if consumed in large amounts. With continued use, however, most people develop a degree of tolerance to sugar alcohols and no longer experience these symptoms. How are sugar alcohols labelled? A product that contains sugar alcohols will have the names of these sweeteners listed on the ingredients label. They are usually included in the amount of carbohydrate on the ingredients list, either in the total count or on a separate line for sugar alcohols. How do they compare with other carbohydrates? While sugar alcohols have fewer calories than sugar (sucrose), they have less food energy and are not as sweet (with the exception of Xylitol ), meaning they must be used in larger quantities to get the same sweetening effect as table sugar. How sugar alcohols compare to other carbohydrates and GI Sugar Alcohol Sweetness relative to sucrose Food energy (kcal/g) Sweetness perfood energy, relative to sucrose Glycemic Index (GI) Erythritol 0.812 0.213 15 0 Hydrogenated Starch Hydrolysate (HSH) 0.4–0.9 3.0 0.52–1.2 39 Isomalt 0.5 2.0 1.0 9 Lactitol 0.4 2.0 0.8 6 Maltitol 0.9 2.1 1.7 36 Mannitol 0.5 1.6 1.2 0 Sorbitol 0.6 2.6 0.92 9 Xylitol 1.0 2.4 1.6 13 Compared with Sucrose 1.0 4.0 1.0 60 The table above shows how the most widely-used sugar alcohols differ in terms of sweetness, food energy and blood sugar impact, compared to sucrose. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.