===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diet/glycaemic-index-diet-and-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Glycemic index - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:02.150760",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Glycemic index - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1171,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Glycemic index - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? A low glycemic index diet can be particularly effective for people with diabetes if portion control is also applied to those foods with higher carbohydrate content. This is the basis of working out a food’s glycemic load Low GI diets are diets which incorporate foods which are more slowly converted into energy by the body. The NHS notes that low GI diets can be a suitable option for people with diabetes as they can help to blood glucose levels more stable than diets based around high GI foods. What does low and high GI mean? The glycemic Index ranks food depending on the rate at which the body breaks it down to form glucose High GI foods are those that are quickly broken down into glucose. Typical examples of high GI foods include white bread, sweetened drinks, biscuits, potatoes and oranges. Low GI foods are those that are broken down more slowly by the body. Typical examples of low GI foods include whole grain bread, milk, beans, leafy vegetables and berries. What do low GI foods do in relation to diabetes? As low GI foods tend to break down more slowly, they are less likely to cause a rapid increase in blood sugar levels compared to high GI foods and therefore they are a better option for keeping stable blood glucose levels. Favouring low GI foods over high GI foods leaves you feeling more satisfied over a longer period of time, and less likely to feel hungry before the next meal. What do high GI foods do in relation to diabetes? High GI foods break down very quickly causing blood glucose levels to rise sharply. People with diabetes refer to sharp rises in blood sugar levels as ‘spikes’ in blood sugar. Furthermore, for those who produce their own insulin , high GI foods can force the body to try to produce a surge of insulin to counteract the quick acting carbohydrates and a common consequence of this is a feeling of hunger within 2 to 3 hours, which can leave the dieter craving more food. For people with diabetes, this can be particularly dangerous as the ability of the body to control blood glucose levels is reduced or non-existent. For this reason, people with diabetes have to be careful when it comes to eating high GI foods Benefits of low GI diets Low GI diet generally have the following benefits: Have a higher nutritional value than higher GI equivalents Provide prolonged release of energy Reduce the immediate demand for insulin following eating Allow for a varied diet to be eaten Glycemic index charts make food choices easy to follow Disadvantages of low GI diets The main disadvantage of low GI diets for people with diabetes comes if the overall carbohydrate content of meals is too high for the body to comfortably cope with. For example, a large portion of a bran based cereal for breakfast will typically be low GI but could contain a relatively high value of carbohydrate. In this case, the carbohydrate content of the meal could be too high for some people with diabetes, causing their blood glucose levels to rise too high over a period of hours. However, this needn’t be such a problem if portion control is applied to any foods that have a higher carbohydrate content. When the glycaemic index value of a food and its carbohydrate content are taken into account together, this is the basis of working out the glycemic load of a portion. What foods are considered low GI? Low GI foods that are considered suitable for people with diabetes include Some fruit Non-starchy vegetables Whole grains Nuts Lean meats Unsweetened dairy produce legumes Care should be taken with fruits and vegetables as the GI value of these food groups can vary quite significantly. Lower GI fruits include berries, plums, kiwi fruit and grapefruit. Higher GI fruits include bananas, oranges, mango, grapes, raisins, dates and pears. Lower GI vegetables include lettuce, broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower and peppers. Higher GI vegetables include carrots, potatoes, parsnips, beetroots and sweetcorn. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Diet You may have heard about GLP-1 which is the hormone at the… 4 minute read