===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/vegetarian-diet.html",
  "title": "Vegetarian diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:32.426759",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Vegetarian diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 989,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Vegetarian diet - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Amar Singh Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Diet is important to maintain health for everyone. However, amongst diabetics, choosing a sustainable and healthy diet is essential. Diet is one of the most important ways of controlling diabetes, and combined with appropriate exercise and medication can offer a fast route to keeping blood glucose stable. A well-balanced vegetarian diet, with an emphasis on low fat, high fibres, and high carbohydrates can be particularly suitable for diabetic patients. See also: Diabetes and Vegetarianism I am diabetic, why eat well? Genetic pre-conditioning aside, obesity is the major risk factor for type 2 diabetics. Diets that are high in fat and a lifestyle lacking in exercise, have lead to obesity spreading like wildfire across the Western world. In the USA, Australia and England obesity is a major and developing problem. Excess abdominal fat lessens bodily ability to utilise insulin , leaving sugar to build up in the bloodstream. See also: Pre Diabetes A recent study by the Diabetes Prevention Program found that diets with low-fat and low-calories, when combined with moderate exercise, lead to significantly reduced risks of diabetes with a figure of over 50 per cent. By contrast, the popular diabetes drug metformin increased insulin sensitivity by just over 30 per cent. The importance of diet is obvious for diabetics. I am diabetic, why go vegetarian? Vegetarianism excludes high-calorie foods and animal products laden with saturated fats. It instead concentrates on foods that give necessary minerals and vitamins that help give diabetics a better chance of blood glucose control. These include whole grains, legumes, fruits and vegetables. Vegetarian diets are rich in fibre, which has numerous benefits. When a diabetic eats a fibre-rich meal, the desire for further food disappears. Fibre also plays a protective role for pre-diabetics, and can lead to lower daily requirements of insulin amongst type 1 diabetics. Fibre is well known as being important in the improving blood sugar control, lowering cholesterol levels and providing folate, thereby reducing the risk of complications like heart disease Considerable research is available as evidence for the role of fibre in diabetes. Recent nutritional research suggests that diabetics should partake in as many as nine servings in the vegetable and fruit group, and up to six servings of whole grains for optimum benefit. Will a gradual change to vegetarianism benefit me as a diabetic? Absolutely. In most cases it is important to take things at your own pace. No-one can dictate your diet apart from yourself, and it will have to adapt to suit your personal tastes. Thankfully, the range of foods and recipes are enormous. Learning how to cook healthily takes time, but beyond this your body will need time to adjust to the difference in food. There are numerous Internet resources dedicated to introducing dietary changes. Are diabetic vegetarian recipes available online? There are many Internet recipe resources available for the diabetic, including vegetarian recipes. Diabetics should consult their nutritionist or healthcare team before following any recipes. See also: Diabetic Recipes What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Diet You may have heard about GLP-1 which is the hormone at the… 4 minute read