===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/Food-tips-for-diabetics.html",
  "title": "Food tips for diabetics - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:04:53.256616",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Food tips for diabetics - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1135,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Food tips for diabetics - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? I’ve been diagnosed with diabetes, what should I eat? It’s a common question so we’ve compiled healthy eating food tips to help you towards a healthy diet. Bear in mind that an appropriate diet for someone with diabetes depends entirely on the individual. To get an insight into the food and diets that others with diabetes are eating, see the Diabetes Food Forum 1. Eat at least 5 portions of vegetables and fruit a day The NHS advises that we eat at least 5 portions of vegetables and fruit a day, amounting to 400g. Ensuring we eat at least 5 a day, each day has been shown to reduce risks of a range of common health problems including heart disease and cancer. Examples of single portions of vegetables and fruit include: [26] 2 good sized florets of broccoli 8 Brussels sprouts 2 inch piece of cucumber Half an avocado 1 medium sized apple 2. Eat less sugar It’s an obvious one for people with diabetes and it also applies to people without diabetes. Eating less sugar helps to reduce calorie intakes and helps to lower blood sugar levels. It’s worth bearing in mind that whilst reducing sugar intake is generally a good idea, people who are suffering hypoglycemia should take sugar to bring their blood glucose up. 3. Eat red meat less than once day A large scale, long term study (of 120,00 people over a period of over 20 years) by Harvard University found that eating red meat each day was statistically linked with higher incidences of cancer and heart disease. Eating processed meats was found to have even higher incidences. [27] 4. Include fish and lean meats In the study mentioned above, consumption of fish and lean meats instead of red meat was shown to help lower the statistical chance of developing cancer or heart disease. 5. Type 1 diabetes, count carbohydrates For people with type 1 diabetes, counting carbohydrates is a key part of managing the condition. Because people with type 1 diabetes take insulin, it’s essential that the right balance of insulin and carbohydrate is achieved. 6. Type 2 diabetes, watch carbohydrates Whilst there is less need for people with type 2 diabetes to actively count the carbohydrates being eaten, it is a good idea to be aware of the carbohydrates you’re eating as carbohydrate has a direct effect on blood sugar levels 7. Eat according to your blood glucose results Charity Diabetes UK points out that it is important for blood sugar levels to be as near to normal as possible. The food we eat can make a significant difference to blood glucose levels of people with diabetes. Home blood glucose testing helps us to monitor how our blood glucose levels respond to what we eat. As diet has a significant effect on blood sugar levels, it therefore makes sense to eat foods that will not adversely affect your blood glucose. Testing your blood sugar before a meal and 2 hours after will often provide an indication of how a meal has affected your blood glucose levels. 8. Limit salt intake to 6g per day Government recommendations are to consume no more than 6g of salt each day. Salt is often present in pre-packaged foods such as a number of breakfast cereals, tinned soup, breads, sauces and ready meals. 9. Think about portion sizes If you are overweight, reducing portion sizes can help to reduce the calories you eat and therefore help with weight management. The UK government’s Change4Life campaign advises choosing a smaller sized plate to eat meals from. 10. Reduce alcohol intake Alcohol affects people with diabetes in a number of ways. Alcohol inhibits the liver which can lead to hypoglycemia in people on certain diabetes medication. Alcohol is a source of calories and therefore can make weight management more difficult. Over consumption of alcohol is also associated with a number of health complications such as: Heart disease Stroke Cancer Liver damage What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.