===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/food/tea-and-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Tea and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:04:15.064358",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Tea and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 793,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Tea and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Tea is one of the nation’s favourite drinks and research suggests it’s also a healthy drink. Tea brings a number of health benefits including improving insulin sensitivity. However, research notes that some the benefits are best experienced if you drink your tea without milk. Benefits of tea Research suggests the following benefits may be enjoyed from tea: Improving insulin sensitivity Maintaining healthy blood pressure Preventing blood clots Reducing risk of cardiovascular disease Reducing risks of developing type 2 diabetes Reducing risks of developing cancer How does tea help diabetes? Teas such as black tea, green tea and oolong tea contain polyphenols which researchers believe may increase insulin activity. A number of studies have shown positive effects of tea: Drinking two cups of tea each day could help you live longer Green tea and coffee found to reduce risk of death among type 2 diabetes Can tea prevent diabetes? Polyphenols are known to have anti-oxidative properties which can help protect against inflammation and carcinogens. In other words, the properties in tea can help to prevent type 2 diabetes as well as cancer . Other factors for preventing type 2 diabetes include: Eating minimal amounts of processed foods Eating fresh vegetables regularly through the day Including physical activity into each day Not smoking Keeping alcohol intake low Tea and stress relief Tea also contains tiny micronutrients called flavonoids which can help parts of the body to function better. There are many different types of flavonoid and each have different health properties. One flavonoid of interest that is found in tea is theanine which can help to control blood pressure and lower stress. Which type of tea is best to drink? The latest research indicates that green and black teas are as effective as each other in providing health benefits. Other type of tea which have been found to have benefits include: Oolong tea Chamomile tea Rooibos tea Ginger tea What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.