===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/nutrition/fat-and-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Fat and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:04:43.828535",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Fat and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1174,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Fat and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Amar Singh Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Along with protein and carbohydrates, fat is one of the main macronutrients. Unlike carbohydrate, and to a small extent protein, the fat we eat does not directly raise our blood sugar levels , whether we have diabetes or not. Fat is needed by the body for providing energy, keeping hair and skin healthy, helping our cells to function properly and for protecting our body and organs. Which food is fat found in? Fats are found in a range of foods which include nuts, avocados, beans, fish, meat, milk, cheese and other dairy products. Fat is also used in the frying of foods and within processed foods including crisps, cakes, pastries and other bakery foods. What are good and bad fats? Good fat has typically been used to describe unsaturated fats that are found in nuts, avocados, oily fish, and oils such as sunflower and olive oil. Saturated fats are often referred to as ‘bad fats’. Saturated fat is frequently found in less healthy foods such as crisps, chips and muffins but they are also found in meats, butter and other dairy. The terms good and bad fats are a crude simplification and there is significant debate within nutrition research about which fats deserve to be termed ‘bad fats’. In 2014, research from the University of Cambridge showed that the saturated fats found in dairy conveyed a lower risk of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes than starchy foods. What are trans fats? Trans fats can be naturally occurring (in relatively tiny quantities) but generally refers to ‘man made’ fats that have been hydrogenated to chemically change the structure of the fat molecules. Trans fats have been around for decades but in recent years they have come under scrutiny as they can be dangerous to health if consumed in too high quantities. Read more on trans fats Diabetes and low fat diets The advice of the NHS is for people to reduce the amount of fat, and particularly saturated fat, in their diet. The low fat approach has been strongly recommended for people with diabetes. However, low fat diets have come under a certain amount of criticism in that low fats diets often require a relatively high amount of carbohydrate in the diet which can lead to overproduction of insulin and could therefore lead to increased hunger through the day, weight gain and increased health problems. Deficiencies of vitamins A and D in low fat diets, which help to prevent the development of osteoporosis, has also been a criticism of the diet. Fat and cholesterol When discussing the fat we eat and cholesterol, it is important to recognise the different types of fat as well as the different types of cholesterol There are two different forms of cholesterol, LDL (low density lipoproteins) and HDL (high density lipoproteins). Whilst both forms are essential for the body, having either high levels of LDL or low levels of HDL is associated with higher risks of heart disease. For this reason, LDL is often referred to as bad cholesterol and HDL as good cholesterol. An additional form of blood fats are triglycerides. High triglyceride levels are linked with higher rates of heart disease and other complications so any lowering of triglyceride levels is beneficial. Saturated fats Saturated fat can raise levels of both LDL and HDL. The type of foods you consume can make a difference though. A low carb, high fat diet with a strong intake of vegetables is usually associated with beneficial effects on cholesterol, such as raised HDL levels and lower triglyceride levels. Diets with a high amount of saturated fat coming from processed food such as chips, cakes and biscuits, however, are linked with poorer cholesterol levels and higher triglyceride levels. Unsaturated fats Unsaturated fat from nuts and avocados (the fats termed good fats) help to increase levels of HDL (good cholesterol). HDL has a key role in helping to remove LDL from healed artery walls and back to the liver. HDL (good cholesterol) can therefore help to prevent LDL cholesterol from blocking arteries. For this reason, it is believed to be beneficial to include foods with unsaturated fats, such as nuts, avocados and oily fish within one’s diet. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.