===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/food/fruit.html",
  "title": "Fruit and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:04:56.324253",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Fruit and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 922,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Fruit and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Along with vegetables, fruit is one of the healthiest food groups and contains an important source of vitamin C which helps to keep our cells healthy. Can someone with diabetes eat fruit? People with diabetes can eat fruit. However, fruit can be quite sugary so bear this in mind to prevent blood sugar levels rising too high Daily recommendations of fruit The Department of Health advises us to consume at least 5 portions of fruit or vegetables a day. The American Diabetes Associations recommends fruit as a good option if you’re having a dessert Effect on diabetes Fruit is naturally quite high in sugars and fruit will typically have more carbohydrate than non-starchy vegetables. Some fruits are more sugary than others. For example, banana and oranges are examples of more sugary fruits whereas berries are examples of less sugary fruits. You may find therefore that you need to choose smaller portions of certain fruits depending on your blood glucose levels Fruit juices and smoothies typically contain a lot of fruit sugar so exercise caution with how much fruit juice you consume. Health benefits of fruit Fruit helps to supply us with fibre, minerals and vitamins, and they are particularly high in their supply of vitamin C. Vitamin C is important for preventing our cells being damaged. Fibre helps digestion and is linked with helping reduce cholesterol levels As with vegetables, different fruit have different characteristics. For example grapefruit contains a healthy amount of vitamin A and potassium whereas berries are good sources of vitamin K and manganese. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention note that eating the recommended quantity of fruit and vegetables may reduce susceptibility to chronic disease and cancers. Which fruits are lowest in carbs? A question that is often asked is which fruits have the lowest carbs/sugar content: Health risks of fruit Whilst fruit is recognised as being a very healthy food, the relatively high sugar content of fruit juices has been linked by research with higher incidences of colorectal cancer. The Western Australian Institute for Medical Research found, in a study, that those that drank fruit juice had increased instances of colorectal cancer Cancer Research responded to the study by stating: “This isn’t a large study, and it doesn’t give us clear answers about whether different fruits and vegetables affect the risk of cancer in parts of the bowel.” Dried fruit is higher in carbohydrate than undried fruit and non-organic dried fruit may also be preserved with sulphites. Sulphites in food may have been linked with bringing on symptoms in asthmatic people. Sulphites may appear on food labels as ‘sulphur dioxide’ or an ingredient containing the words ‘sulphite’ or ‘sulfite’. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.