===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetic-food.html",
  "title": "Diabetic food - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:47.301117",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Diabetic food - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1064,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Diabetic food - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Diabetic food is fast becoming an obsolete term. Yet, this doesn’t stop thousands of diabetics believing they have to buy this food and countless manufacturers selling diabetic food products. The situation has reached the point at which Diabetes UK and the Food Standards Agency have issued a joint statement calling for an end to ‘diabetic food’ and ‘suitable for diabetics’ on food labels. Dietary policy This shift in dietary policy is largely down to changing diet advice, which recommends that any food is suitable for people with diabetes in sensible moderation. Concern has existed for some time that labelling a food as ‘diabetic’ could mislead people with diabetes into thinking that the food was essential or at the least especially suitable. Often, diabetic foods are more expensive than standard products, with sugar-free and low-sugar versions also often misleading. Often, ‘diabetic’ food labelling is applied to sweet food such as biscuits and chocolate. According to the joint statement – people who eat sugary food should do so sparingly, and only as part of a healthy and balanced diet. Effectively, healthy eating advice provided by the authorities is the same for people with diabetes as it is for those without. Essentially, specially designated ‘diabetic’ foods should now become a thing of the past. I am diabetic, should I eat diabetic food? No, people with diabetes don’t need to eat special diabetic food. Health authorities and Diabetes UK advise a healthy, balanced diet with no need to seek out specially labelled food. Because a manufacturer labels a food as ‘suitable for diabetics’ doesn’t mean that other food is necessarily unsuitable for diabetics. Why should I avoid diabetic food? Firstly, ‘diabetic’ food is often much more expensive than other types of food. Secondly, this type of food may offer no additional health benefits for the buyer. Because of this, it is recommended that diabetics don’t need to focus their food buying on diabetic food. Will diabetic food hurt me? Choosing diabetic food over healthy, natural products may damage your blood glucose control more than eating a balanced diet. However, ‘diabetic’ foods of themselves may also synthetic sugars which can send blood glucose levels up Remember, always read labels carefully and don’t be drawn in by a food which is ‘suitable for diabetics.’ What the community have to say about diabetic food K9kitty : I think diabetic foods are still sold from the old days when it was thought diabetics need to avoid sugar at all costs, hence, finding something sweet with an alternative sweetener in and there is still a market for them or they wouldn’t be stocked. Angeldust : It’s a total sham. I avoid synthetic sugars like the plague. They do a million times more harm than real sugar in moderation. The food industry produces them for next to nothing and the profit margin is huge. Noblehead : Diabetic Food-Why is it sold? Good questio, totally unnecessary and a complete waste of money! Witan : It really is time that the ‘Diabetic food’ description had some regulatory control or was banned completely. It is open to every manufacturers own interpretation and as has already been said is often not just useless but misleading and bordering on harmful. B@rnstormer : I’ve eaten Thorntons diabetic milk chocolate bar, diabetic Turkish delight bars, diabetic fudge bars and assorted diabetic individual chocolates and I have never had any stomach upsets after doing so. It obviously affects some people more than others; it seems a bit unfair to say everyone should steer clear of them. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.