===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/sugary-soft-drinks.html",
  "title": "Sugary soft drinks - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:04:20.392010",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Sugary soft drinks - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1018,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Sugary soft drinks - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Amar Singh Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Sugary soft drinks, sometimes referred in common usage as ‘full fat’ drinks, have frequently been linked with poorer health if consumed on a regular basis. Large scale research indicates that regular consumption of sugary drinks, including cola, lemonade and energy drinks, raises the risks of obesity , heart disease and type 2 diabetes. Generally speaking, sugary soft drinks are best avoided by people with diabetes and consumed less regularly by people at a higher risk of type 2 diabetes. Recommended daily sugar intakes in the UK The Department of Health recommends that not more than 10% of energy each day comes from sugars. This equates to 70g or less of sugar for men and 50g or less for women. A half litre bottle of a sweetened drink, such as cola, contributes around 60% of the recommended maximum sugar intake. There is no specific recommended sugar intake for people with diabetes, but most people will find they need to limit their sugar intake to considerably less than the Department of Health recommendation to ensure good blood glucose control Sweetened beverages and diabetes Sweetened, sugary drinks can cause sharp rises in blood sugar levels for people with diabetes or glucose intolerance (including prediabetes and gestational diabetes) and so it’s usually best to avoid drinking sugary drinks. Sugary drinks and hypos One time when sugary can be useful, however, for people with diabetes is if the person’s blood glucose levels go too low ( hypoglycemia ). If a person is on certain forms of diabetic medication (notably insulin ), hypoglycemia can become a particularly dangerous condition. Sugary drinks help to raise blood sugar levels quickly and therefore make for a good treatment for low blood sugar levels. Between 100 and 150ml of a sugary drink such as cola or a glucose drink can help to raise low blood glucose levels back to normal. Read more about recognising and treating hypos Sugary drinks can also be useful for people with diabetes prior to, or during, exercise to keep blood glucose levels from going too low. Sugary drinks and type 2 diabetes risk A meta-analysis ran by Harvard University in 2010 found that regular intake of sugary drinks, 1 or more cans a day, have a 26% increased risk of type 2 diabetes. Sugary drinks and weight gain Consumption of sugary could contribute to increased weight gain. A half litre of cola contributes about 11% of an adult’s daily calorie intake. One problem with sugary drinks is that they very rapidly increase blood sugar levels and this can lead to tiredness and increased hunger even in people without diabetes. Another problem with sugary soft drinks is that they don’t contribute any nutritional value aside from energy. Long term research studies show that those that as intake of sugary drinks increase, so does weight gain in both men and women. Looking to reduce your weight? See our guides on diabetes and weight loss Sugary drinks and children’s health Childhood obesity has become a growing worry in the 21st century and the availability of sugary drinks for children is thought to be one of the factors involved. As prevalence of childhood obesity has rise, there has also been a corresponding rise in children developing type 2 diabetes What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.