===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/nutrition/sugar.html",
  "title": "Sugar and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:05:07.441751",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Sugar and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1650,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Sugar and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Sugar has become perhaps the most discussed dietary issue in recent years with more and more research studies linking the effects of sugar to greater risks of obesity and type 2 diabetes . Statistics show that most of us in the UK are consuming more sugar than is good for our health. Many of us are unaware that starchy foods like bread, rice or potatoes are broken down by digestion into surprisingly large amounts of sugar; a small slice of wholemeal bread is equivalent to three spoonful’s of sugar. It’s important therefore that your diet does not contain too much carbohydrate either. A major cause of this has come from the high amounts of sugars added to a wide range of processed foods . Sugar has extra relevance to people with diabetes as sugar has a formidable effect in raising blood sugar levels. Sources of sugar Sugar in the diet can be found in 3 forms. Sugar can be: Natural – as found in fruit and honey Added – as found in biscuits or cereals The product of the digestion of more complex carbohydrates (e.g. bread) There are natural sugars found in fruit , milk based products and vegetables. Added sugars, also called free sugars, refer to the sugars that are added to a whole range of processed foods and drinks, including microwave meals, pasta sauces, breakfast cereals, sweetened drinks and desserts. Sugar and type 2 diabetes Sugar is a form of carbohydrate that will quickly affect your blood sugar levels if you have diabetes. All carbohydrate raises blood glucose levels and sugar has a very quick effect. It is therefore important not to have too much sugar in your daily diet. ‘Sugar diabetes’ Type 2 diabetes was once referred to as sugar diabetes – because sugar is at the heart of the problem. For somebody with diabetes, it is the total sugar burden from any of the three sources (natural, added or as a product of the digestion of complex carbohydrate) which need taking into account to keep blood glucose levels low. Don’t worry, reducing sugar intake reduces the likelihood of needing medication and diabetes-related complications. Research has shown a close association between sugar intake and development of type 2 diabetes. The more sugar in the diet , the higher the risk of type 2 diabetes. This doesn’t mean that your type 2 diabetes has necessarily been caused by eating too much sugar although sugar intake is one of the most important factors. Others include stress , lack of exercise and a genetic predisposition . Added sugar – why is it a worry? All age groups are currently consuming more added sugar than the recommendations according to the National Diet and Nutrition Survey which is carried out by Public Health England. Added sugars have become a real problem because most of us aren’t aware of just how much sugar we are taking in when having what many of us consider everyday foods. Is there a recommended maximum added sugar intake? The Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN), which advises the government on nutrition guidelines, recommends the following limit for added sugars in the diet. Age group Maximum added sugar value 4 to 6 years old No more than 19g 7 to 10 years old No more than 24g 11 or over No more than 30g For reference : 4 grams of sugar is equal to a teaspoon of sugar. Sugars are being added to a huge range of foods from bread and hams to more obvious foods such as cakes and biscuits. The sugar makes food designed to have a long shelf life more palatable but this is having a negative effect on health of those of us that are living off these foods. Most of us will be aware of more obvious sugary, such as sugary fizzy drinks , cakes and biscuits but there are also other foods which contain a lot of sugar that may not be immediately obvious. Three different sources of sugars that make up our total dietary ‘sugar burden’; shown as 4g teaspoon of table sugar equivalents: Naturally occuring sugar (1) Foods with added sugar (2) Foods digested down into sugars (3) Banana 4.9 teaspoons/100g Coco Pops (ave) 24.4 teaspoons/100g Brown bread 10.8 teaspoons/100g Honey 17.6 teaspoons/100g Fanta (Orange) 3.4 teaspoons/100ml Boiled spaghetti 3.7 teaspoons/100g Skimmed Milk 0.9 teaspoons/100ml Digestive biscuits 8.8 teaspoons/100g French fries 5.1 teaspoons/100g Raisins 17.1 teaspoons/100g Malt loaf 14.7 teaspoons/100g Basmati rice 6.8 teaspoons/100g Apple juice 4.3 teaspoons/100ml Raspberry yoghurt 2.4 teaspoons/100g Baked potato 6.3 teaspoons/100g Note: as each food would effect blood glucose, from the International tables of glycaemic index and glycaemic load (Atkinso, Foster-Powell et al. 2008) as per the calculations in a paper submitted to The British Journal of Obesity ‘It’s the glycaemic response to, not the carbohydrate content of food that matters in diabetes and obesity: The glycaemic index revisited.’ D J Unwin et al. What is not so well known is that starchy carbohydrates such as bread, rice potatoes or pasta are broken down by digestion into surprising amounts of sugar. This means that just avoiding sugar itself may not always be enough. This is why recent government (NICE) guidelines ‘encourage high-fibre, low glycaemic index sources of carbohydrate in the diet’. Why is sugar bad for us? Sugar provides energy but has no other nutritional value. Sugar is therefore often referred to as empty calories. Sugar raises blood glucose levels quickly and requires insulin to be produced (or taken by injection) as high blood glucose levels over time cause damage. Insulin causes the cells of your body to take up the free glucose in your bloodstream. So having too much sugar means having or needing more insulin As many of the cells taking up glucose are fat cells, insulin itself can give rise to weight gain and the development of insulin resistance , the hallmark of type 2 diabetes. [166] Many people find that sugar has addictive qualities meaning that we may crave sugary foods even if we know they’re not good for us. [167] Health problems connected with sugar Sugars, and particularly the problem of added sugars, have been linked with increased risks of the following health problems: [168] [169] Weight gain and obesity Type 2 diabetes Tooth decay Heart disease How to cut down on sugar The good news is that reducing sugar intake reduces the likelihood of needing medication and diabetes-related complications. Cutting back on all sources of sugar is a great strategy to stay healthy. Cut down on sugary drinks – non-diet versions of cola, lemonade, tonic water Swap fruit juices for water and whole fruit Replace sugary cereals with plain porridge, whole grain cereals or lower carb breakfasts Avoid having ready meals, tinned meals on a regular basis Make your own pasta or curry sauce – you can make larger portions and freeze what you don’t need for a future meal Get into the practice of having fruit instead of sugary snacks or desserts Don’t have takeaways more than once a fortnight What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.