===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diet/paleolithic-diet.html",
  "title": "Paleo diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:19.059972",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Paleo diet - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1086,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Paleo diet - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? The paleolithic (or paleo) diet is based on the food that is believed to be similar to the daily diet of cave people. The theory is that the food cavemen and cavewomen survived on is good for health because it was what the human body was meant to eat. Paleolithic diets are thought to be especially useful for people with diabetes, with possible benefits including weight loss , increased insulin sensitivity and improved heart health You should speak to your doctor or dietitian if are you considering going paleo to evaluate whether the diet would be suitable for you. What is a Paleo diet? A well-formulated paleo diet typically resembles a low-carb diet The focus is on eating fresh foods and removing processed foods including dairy, starches and refined sugar. A paleo diet will usually be: Lower in carbohydrate Higher in protein Moderate or higher in fat Paleo diets are categorised into two groups of food: in and out. Pre-agricultural/animal foods such as red meat and fish are i, but Neolithic era foods such as grains and dairy are not. This cuts out a lot of the bad aspects of a Western diet. Alcohol, dairy and coffee are generally rejected on the diet, but some people may choose to modify their diet to allow these foods on occasion. It depends how strict you wish to be. A good intake of non-starchy vegetables is recommended when following the diet. Read more about foods to eat on a paleo diet Why would someone eat a Paleo diet? Many people who eat paleolithic diets are looking to return to their roots and eat more healthily Advocates argue that humans were able to live and thrive on the diet for 40,000 years and that modern lifestyle diseases could be prevented by returning to paleo foods. People with diabetes can attain several benefits from the paleo diet, improving their health and reducing the risk of developing health complications in later life. How does a paleo diet work? How does a paleo diet work? Because most foods and ingredients on the diet are low in carbohydrate, the need for insulin is reduced within the body. This can help to prevent insulin resistance and reduce the risk of developing health problems such as high blood glucose levels and heart disease. There are no fixed macronutrient ratios on a paleo diet, but paleo diet sources tend to agree that macros should be are around 20% carbs, 30% protein and 50% fat. There is less need for strict portion control with paleo foods than there is for low-fat diets. However, be mindful not to over-indulge on foods such as fruit, nuts or excessive meat. Benefits of a paleo diet Weight loss is the most discernible early benefit of the paleo diet, which derives from eating low-carb, cutting out processed food and eating lots of vegetables. Reduced body fat and increased muscle mass are other possible benefits of the diet as it is low-carb and relatively high protein. Additional benefits include greater energy levels, improved heart health and less inflammation. Read more about the benefits of a paleo diet. Paleo diet side effects Because you have to exclude certain food groups on the paleo diet your body can take time to adapt. Some side effects can occur as a result, but these are not the same for everyone; some can experience no side effects at all. Low-carb flu is a common side effect, which results due to lower carb intake. Initially some people can also experience fatigue and a lack of energy. This tends to disappear within a few days. Read more about the side effects of a paleo diet. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.