===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/food/diabetic-breakfast.html",
  "title": "Breakfast ideas - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:03:35.867412",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Breakfast ideas - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 921,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Breakfast ideas - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? Breakfast is said to be the most important meal of the day. For people with diabetes, morning is usually the time of day with the highest blood glucose levels so a good breakfast choice will help to improve your control. Whilst putting the breakfast list together, we found some supermarket cereals that were far from the ideal choice for breakfast – with high levels of sugar (with some cereals containing chocolate ) and a number of other less than healthy additives. We’ve put together some simple and healthy breakfast ideas to get you started. Greek yoghurt and cottage cheese Greek yoghurt and cottage cheese make good breakfast choices. Quick to put together and easy to tailor to your own desires by adding any of the following: Nuts – always a good source of energy and a low carb favourite Oatmeal or wheat bran for fibre ( whole grains ) Berries are a popular choice Fruit – cantaloupe is listed as a good accompaniment Smoothies A very simple idea – take a mix of food, stick it in a blender and drink it. Some mixtures work better than others and it can be fun to find out which do work. For the dedicated, making smoothies can be quite an art form to get the colour and consistencies just right. For us with diabetes, we also need to consider the carbohydrate content to our own requirements. Rather than suggest one smoothie, here are some ingredient ideas to get you started for your own smoothies – be they savoury or fruity: Cucumbers Carrots Avocados – help to make your smoothies creamy Berries Citrus fruits –oranges, pineapple, limes etc Bananas – also help to make your smoothies creamy Cashew nuts Yoghurt Cottage cheese Cream Coconut milk If you hit upon a fantastic smoothie mixture, share your find on the diabetes food forum Scrambled eggs and omelette A great breakfast for keeping insulin requirements low and another choice for which you can let your imagination go by adding any of the following: Mushrooms Tomatoes Peppers Fresh leafy spinach Cheese Bacon / ham – meat would be used, for example, if following the Dukan Diet Porridge Some of us with diabetes can handle porridge well, whereas for others it can send blood sugar through the roof If your numbers can happily handle porridge then it can be a satisfying choice. Weetabix, Oatibix, Shredded Wheat For those who can handle a few more carbs than the rest of us, Weetabix, Oatibix and Shredded Wheat can make for good choices. High in fibre, relatively low in sugar (for a cereal) and one of the more natural cereal choices available in supermarkets. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.