===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diet-for-type1-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Diet for type 1 diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "diet",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:02:39.573417",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Diet for type 1 diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 838,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Diet for type 1 diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Tags diabetes , diet , Type 1 Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Food and Diet Diet Acid-alkaline diet Diet plans Diet for type 1 diabetes Diet for type 2 diabetes 5:2 diet Atkins diet Carbohydrates and diabetes DASH diet Detox diet Dukan diet Gluten free diet Glycemic index (GI) Glycemic load Juicing diet Ketogenic diet Low calorie diet Low carb diet Low fat diet Meal replacement diet plans Mediterranean diet Newcastle study diet NHS diet advice Paleolithic diet Paleo keto diet Raw food diet South beach diet Vegan diet Vegetarian diet Very low calorie diet Zone diet Drinks and alcohol What can I drink? Alcohol and diabetes Alcohol and blood sugar Alcohol and hypoglycemia Alcohol substitutes Hangover cures Coffee Fruit juice Milk Tea Soft drinks and diabetes Diet soft drinks and diabetes Water Food Diabetic food Diabetic exchange Diabetic exchange questions Diabetes food pyramid Diabetes friendly foods Diabetes superfoods Carbohydrate counting Chocolate and diabetes Cholesterol and diet Fasting Fast food Food for a healthy diet Food diaries Food labelling Food tips Meal planning Portion control Portion distortion Plate method Slimming clubs Which slimming club is best? Food groups Dairy Eggs, beans & pulses Fish Food groups Fruit Lean meat Processed foods Non-starchy vegetables Nuts Red meat Starchy vegetables Whole grains Food ideas Bread alterntives Diabetes cookbook Diabetic breakfast ideas Diabetic cakes Dairy alternatives Eating out with diabetes Low carb lunch ideas Low carb desserts Low carb dinner ideas Low carb flour alternatives Low carb snacks Low sugar sweets Milk alternatives Nutrition Carbohydrates Chromium Diabetes nutrition Dietary supplements Fat Fibre Protein Salt Simple carbs vs complex carbs Sugar Sugar vs fat Trans fats Vitamins and minerals Vitamin D Special occasions Christmas Diwali Easter Halloween Ramadan Sweeteners Low calorie sweeteners Nutritive and non-nutritive sweeteners Role of sugar in our diet Sugar alcohols Which artificial sweetener should I choose? The dietary advice generally given to people with type 1 diabetes is not much different to the dietary advice for people without diabetes. The main issues to consider are how sharply different foods are likely to impact on your blood glucose levels and how to balance the quantity of carbohydrate with the right amount of insulin. Carbohydrate counting Carbohydrate counting plays a key role in helping to balance insulin intake with the food you eat. A number of carbohydrate counting courses are available including the DAFNE course (dose adjustment for normal eating) which is widely recommended by people who have been on it. Another carbohydrate counting resource which is quickly growing in popularity is the Carbs and Cals book which shows, in pictorial form, how many carbohydrates are in a huge variety of different meals and portion sizes. Healthy eating for type 1 diabetes Eating healthily comes highly recommended and can play a part in helping to prevent the development of complications. Eating a balanced diet, containing a variety of different vegetables, will help to provide many nutrients that the body needs. Try to include foods containing unsaturated fats such as nuts, avocados and oily fish. We recommend limiting the amount of processed foods you eat and try to include home prepared or freshly prepared food wherever possible. Read more on healthy eating for diabetes Low carb diets and type 1 diabetes Some people with type 1 diabetes may wish to adopt a reduced carbohydrate diet. Low carb diets can be helpful for people who are struggling to keep control on a carb centered diet or for those who are otherwise looking to tighten their control. One of the benefits of reducing your intake of carbohydrate is in reducing the extent of post meal high blood sugar levels. Lower carb diets will require a reduction in insulin and could result in hypoglycemia if doses are not changed correctly. It is recommended to speak to your doctor before going onto a significantly different diet. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Diet You may have heard about GLP-1 which is the hormone at the… 4 minute read