===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.kidney.org/diabetes",
  "title": "Diabetes and Kidney Disease - NKF",
  "category": "complication/nephropathy",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 1,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-11T03:11:29.818550",
  "source_name": "kidney.org",
  "document_title": "Diabetes and Kidney Disease - NKF",
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Diabetes and Kidney Disease - NKF

Diabetes | National Kidney Foundation Skip to main content Why Managing Phosphorus on Dialysis Can Be So Challenging “There’s Life After Dialysis”: How a Single Dad Found Hope After Kidney Failure New Research Shows Bacteria May Help Kidney Stones Form Gout Isn’t Your Fault: What People With Kidney Disease Need to Know Browse By Type Prevention & Awareness Patient Education Patient Stories Advocacy See all News & Stories Image Two Kidney Xenotransplant Recipients Share What It Was Like to Make History Image NKF Patient Journey Answer a few questions and we will provide you with information about your kidney health. Image CKD Basics Course Learn about the basics of kidney disease, how it is measured, and what happens if you have kidney failure. Image Know Your Risk Answer a few simple questions to find out if you are one of the 33% of adults in the U.S. who is at risk for kidney disease. Featured Topics Nutrition and Kidney Disease, Stages 1-5 (Not on Dialysis) Phosphorus and Your CKD Diet Potassium in Your CKD Diet CKD Diet: How much protein is the right amount? Sodium and Your CKD Diet: How to Spice Up Your Cooking See all Diet & Nutrition Topics Tools & Resources Image Recipe Finder Nutrition is key to managing kidney disease and your overall health Image Find a Dietitian Looking for guidance on a kidney-friendly diet? Find a dietitian in your area. Image Nutrition Your home for resources on eating with kidney disease or to care for your overall kidney health. Treatment & Support Treatment & Support Dialysis Transplant Clinical trials Healthcare Resources Wellness Community Connection Featured Topics Dialysis Hemodialysis Peritoneal Dialysis Home Dialysis Coping Effectively See all Dialysis Topics Study Sheds Light on Transportation Barriers in Dialysis and Why Patient Voices Matter From World Traveler to Dialysis Chair: Lessons in Not Giving Up How the Ransome Family Is Raising Awareness about Childhood Kidney Disease Strength in Sharing: “There’s Power in Telling Your Kidney Story.” Image Do you need support? NKF PEERS is a program where kidney patients, living donors, or care partners can connect over the phone with a trained mentor. Featured Topics Kidney Transplant Kidney Xenotransplantation The Kidney Transplant Waitlist Life with a Kidney Transplant See all Transplant Topics “There’s Life After Dialysis”: How a Single Dad Found Hope After Kidney Failure How Belmont Cameli Saved Seven Lives in a Kidney Donation Chain “I Thought I Was Too Old to Donate a Kidney” Peach Pit Lead Singer Donates Kidney to His Cousin Image Kidney Transplantation Resources Considering a kidney transplant? We’ll help you get started. Featured Topics Clinical Trials Are Clinical Trials Safe? Finding out More about Clinical Trials Kidney Disease Clinical Trial Directory Who Can Participate in a Clinical Trial See all Clinical Trial Topics What You Should Know About Complement 3 Glomerulopathy (C3G) Clinical Trials for Pig-to-Human Kidney Transplantation Are Here Basic Science, Clinical Research, and Kidney Disease Treatments Kidney Disease Clinical Trials: Are They Right for You? Image Join the KidneyCARE Study Advance kidney research by sharing your experience living with kidney disease. Image Impact Patient-Centered Research Kidney Research Connect matches you with research projects based on your connection to kidney disease. Image Insurance Insurance doesn’t have to be overwhelming. Learn about insurance options and choosing a plan that is right for you. Image Coping and Self-care Implementing coping strategies and practicing self-care are essential components in effectively managing illness and promoting overall health and well-being. Image Vaccine Information As a dialysis patient or transplant recipient you may be wondering — are vaccines safe for me? Do I need them? Image Nutrition Learn about a kidney-friendly diet, so you can stay healthy with kidney disease whether you are at home or dining out. Image Exercise Exercise is important for everyone, especially for people with kidney disease. Image Sexual Health Kidney disease can affect your sexuality in many ways — from hormones, nerves, energy levels, even medicine. Image NKF Cares Offering support for people affected by kidney disease, organ donation, or transplantation. Image Local and National Events Attend a National Kidney Foundation event close to you. Image NKF Peers Where kidney patients are connected with trained mentors who have been there themselves. Image Become a Patient Advocate Add your voice to Voices for Kidney Health. Image Online Communities Where patients and caregivers can share experiences, ask questions, and get answers. Image Patient Stories Read empowering stories from patients and their loved ones. Transplantation Transplantation Receiving a Kidney Transplant Donating a Kidney Featured Topics Kidney Transplant The Kidney Transplant Waitlist Getting a Kidney Transplant Getting a Living Donor Kidney Transplant Life with a Kidney Transplant See all Transplantation Topics Image Find a Transplant Workshop Join us at a live event near you to learn more with The Big Ask, The Big Give. Image Learn More About Kidney Transplant Dive deep with videos and patient stories in the Kidney Learning Center. Image Resources & Get Involved Get connected for support on your transplant journey. Featured Topics Becoming a Living Donor Making the Decision to Donate Living Kidney Donor Evaluation Living Donor Finances and Insurance What to Expect After Donation See all Kidney Donation Topics Image Learn More About Living Donation Dive deep with videos and donor stories in the Kidney Learning Center. Image Ready to take the next step? Get started with information on how to connect with a transplant center. Image Resources & Get Involved Get connected with others who have donated a kidney. For Professionals For Professionals Professional Membership Continuing Education Research CKDintercept Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) Clinical Tools Image Become a Member Learn more about all the benefits a NKF membership can provide. Image Fellowship of the National Kidney Foundation FNKF recognizes professionals for service to NKF. Image Member Login We are multidisciplinary. We are clinicians and researchers. We are advocates. Image NSW-C The first national credentialed classification for nephrology social work. Image Access to NKF Journals NKF's journals feature the latest research in clinical nephology. Image NKF Professional Councils Representative bodies of NKF's professional membership. Image Professional Education Resource Center CME/CE courses designed for professionals committed to improving patient outcomes. Image Kidney Commute Podcast Providing connection through education and serving as an innovative opportunity to fulfill CE requirements. Image Spring Clinical Meetings NKF’s premiere educational event for the interprofessional kidney health team. Funding Image Grants Access information on available grants and open applications. Image NKF Innovation Fund Learn about our game changing impact investment initiative. Latest Research Image Research Connect Find resources to connect you with patients and data for your research. Image NKF’s Family of Journals NKF's journals feature the latest research in clinical nephrology. Image Research Access grant opportunities, KDOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines, and clinical trial information. What is CKDintercept? A groundbreaking initiative from the National Kidney Foundation to improve chronic kidney disease (CKD) testing, recognition, and management in primary care. Image Learn More About CKDintercept Only 10% of people living with CKD are aware that they have CKD. Image CKDintercept National Overview NKF and partners will develop local road maps to drive a cultural shift in primary care. Image CKD Change Package A systematic approach to transform CKD care, advance health equity, and improve health care quality. What is KDOQI? KDOQI (Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative) is world renowned for improving the diagnosis and treatment of kidney disease, these guidelines have changed the practices of healthcare professionals and improved thousands of lives. Tools & Resources Guidelines and Commentaries Guideline Development Process Patient Centered Quality Measures Learn more about KDOQI Image Vascular Access Guidelines And Implementation Tools Comprehensive slide decks created by interdisciplinary experts. Image KDOQI App Download now to access guidelines and commentaries at your fingertips. Featured Tools CKD Heat Map Kidney Disease Stages Medium Cut-Off Dialyzers for Expanded Hemodialysis Phosphorus for Dialysis Patients CKD Change Package The Interconnectedness of CKD, Systemic Inflammation, and ASCVD See all Clinician Tools Image eGFR Calculator Use our GFR calculators to estimate GFR for adults or children. Image Living Donation Business Case Toolkit Learn more about how to grow your living kidney donation program. Image KDOQI App Download now to access guidelines and commentaries at your fingertips. Image Vascular Access Guidelines And Implementation Tools Comprehensive slide decks created by interdisciplinary experts. Take Action Take Action Fundraising Events Fundraise Your Way Corporate Support Volunteer Image Kidney Walk Participate in NKF's Kidney Walk and fundraise to make a lasting impact for patients, families, and people at risk. Find a Walk near you. Image NKF Golf Classic Join thousands of professionals at the Premier Amateur Golf Event for Charity — held at some of the nation's most exclusive courses. Find a tournament near you. Image Social Events Attend a premier culinary event, meet the most recognizable names in literature, or honor those who help drive life-changing breakthroughs. Find an event near you. Image Create a Fundraiser Celebrate milestones or use your passions and hobbies to bring hope to the 37 million Americans battling kidney disease. Image Kidney Walk Your Way Kidney Walk your way is your chance to be a part of our Kidney Walk community on a date and location of your choice by doing an activity you love! Image Stream for Kidney Health Join the Team Kidney Streams community to help raise important funds and awareness while livestreaming what you love. Image Become a Corporate Partner Learn more about how your company can influence the future of kidney disease. Image Circle of Excellence An employer recognition program dedicated to eliminating barriers to living donation. Image Corporate Wellness Solutions A suite of tools to support organizations in advancing kidney health and overall wellbeing among their employees. Image Be an Advocate Take action and use your voice on behalf of kidney patients with local and national government. Image Volunteer Opportunities Your skills and interests can help build healthier communities, spread the word, and create real change. Find an opportunity near you. Ways to Give Ways to Give Donate Online Philanthropy More Ways to Give Image Become a Monthly Donor Become a Change Maker—give monthly to support critical programs in the fight against kidney disease. Image Donate Now Your gift today will help revolutionize kidney health and transform lives. Image Memorial Giving Create a fundraiser in honor of your loved one. Image Wills, Trusts and Legacy Giving Build your legacy to support families facing kidney disease. Image Donor Advised Funds (DAF) Make a flexible, tax-efficient gift through your Donor-Advised Fund (DAF). Image IRA Charitable Rollover The savviest way for you to use your IRA to maximize your impact. Image Stock Gifts Make a gift of stock. Image Donate by Mail or Phone Use our mail-in donation form to send your offline donation to NKF. Image Donate Your Car Donate your old car, boat or tractor to help improve the lives of the millions, Image Donate Real Estate Fight kidney disease with a gift of property. Image Donate Crypto More ways to fund our work while providing you with extra tax benefits. Image Match Your Donation Double, or even triple, your donation with a matching gift from your employer. About NKF About NKF Diversity, Equity, Inclusion Press Room Kidney Equity for All Careers NKF Leadership Contact Us Local Offices Kidney Disease: Fact Sheet Back to Top Diabetes More than 34 million Americans have diabetes, the leading cause of kidney disease. Learn more about diabetes and your kidneys. What is Diabetes? Diabetes is a condition in which your body has trouble controlling the level of sugar (glucose) in your blood. Insulin is a hormone that regulates the amount of sugar in your blood. With diabetes, your body either does not make enough insulin or cannot use the insulin your body produces effectively. Risk & Diagnosis A major risk factor for kidney disease Diabetes injures small blood vessels in the body. When this happens, your kidneys cannot clean your blood properly. Get tested! The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening for prediabetes and referring to diabetes prevention programs, in addition to screening for undiagnosed diabetes. After kidney transplant Even if you did not have diabetes before, you may develop diabetes after an organ transplant. This type of diabetes is called "new-onset diabetes" after transplant, or "NODAT" for short. Join us at a KEEP Healthy Event! Do you have questions about your kidney health? KEEP Healthy is NKF's community-based initiative to educate about the kidneys, risk factors for kidney disease, and steps to take to keep kidneys healthy and reduce risk. Find an event near you Diabetes & kidney disease What is diabetic kidney disease Diabetic kidney disease is a decrease in kidney function that occurs in some people who have diabetes. 10 tips for managing diabetes Your healthcare team will work closely with you to manage your blood sugar. But most of your day-to-day care is up to you. Here are ten important choices you can make to have a positive effect on your diabetes. Managing blood sugar for kidney health Good management of blood sugar and other self-care efforts can help slow or stop damange to your kidneys from diabetes. Diabetes and your body Over time, having high blood sugar can cause damage to your eyes, nervese, heart, blood vessels, and kidneys. Diabetes and kidney disease in African Americans African Americans are more likely to develop diabetes than non-Hispanic white adults. Diabetes and kidney diseaes in Hispanic Americans Hispanic Americans are more likely to develop diabetes, which increases the risk of developing kidney disease. Kidney disease stages 1-4 A high level of sugar in your blood can cause problems in many parts of your body. Over time, this can lead to kidney disease. Kidney disease stage 5 When kidney failure happens, you need treatment to replace the work of your failed kidneys. Quality of life Diabetes requires daily self-management. At times, this can be challenging. But the benefits are very real. Type 2 diabetes and kidney disease What you should know about the relationship between kidney disease and type 2 diabetes. Diet & Nutrition Emergency meal planning for diabetics on dialysis Carbohydrate counting