===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/php/cbo-guidance/faith-leaders-diabetes-prevention-management.html",
  "title": "Faith Leaders Toolkit: Diabetes Management and Type 2 Diabetes Prevention",
  "category": "cdc_auto_crawl",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 1,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-24T11:12:48.807381",
  "source_name": "cdc.gov",
  "document_title": "Faith Leaders Toolkit: Diabetes Management and Type 2 Diabetes Prevention",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 817,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Faith Leaders Toolkit: Diabetes Management and Type 2 Diabetes Prevention

May 15, 2024

Faith Leaders Toolkit: Diabetes Management and Type 2 Diabetes Prevention

What to know

As a leader in your faith community, you're in an important position to help people prevent type 2 diabetes and manage all types of diabetes. Your members trust you and understand that you support their well-being. You know how to reach and inspire them. You can motivate them to take steps toward healthy living.

Use these resources to help others
This Faith Leaders Toolkit features guides, videos, social media messages, and other resources that make it easy for you to:

Spread the word about type 2 diabetes prevention and diabetes management.
Organize activities to promote type 2 diabetes prevention and diabetes management in your community.
Create an environment that supports healthy choices.

Whether you're just getting started—or you already have a diabetes program in place—this toolkit can help you meet the needs of your congregation.

Spread the word about diabetes
Members of your congregation might not understand their risk for type 2 diabetes. They might not know there are steps they can take to lower their risk or, if they have diabetes, to manage it effectively.
Help them get all the facts about diabetes and make the changes they need to manage their health. Share the resources below with your members who may be at risk for type 2 diabetes or who already have diabetes. There are also resources for family members who may be supporting loved ones with diabetes.
Resources for people with prediabetes
When a person has prediabetes, their blood sugar levels are higher than normal, but not high enough yet to be diagnosed as type 2 diabetes. People with prediabetes are at high risk for developing type 2 diabetes. More than 8 in 10 people with prediabetes don't know they have it.
The good news: people with prediabetes can take steps that are proven to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes.
Prediabetes risk test
Share this test with your congregation to raise awareness about prediabetes and help them find out if they're at risk.
Other resources

On Your Way to Preventing Type 2 Diabetes : A practical guide for taking small steps that add up to a healthy lifestyle your members can stick with.
Preventing Type 2 Diabetes in Kids
Prediabetes – Your Chance to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes

Resources for people with diabetes
People with diabetes can learn about the condition to better manage it and prevent complications such as heart disease, kidney damage, or blindness. Share these resources to help people with diabetes take better care of themselves.

5 Questions to Ask Your Health Care Team
Steps to Help You Stay Healthy With Diabetes
Helping a Loved One With Diabetes When You Live Far Apart
Your Diabetes Care Schedule

Digital resources
Faith communities nationwide are taking advantage of visual and digital media to inform and educate their members. Use videos with small or large groups to spark discussion about prediabetes and preventing or delaying type 2 diabetes. Reach members at risk for diabetes through Facebook, Pinterest, Twitter, or other social networks your organization maintains.

These infographics and social media graphics make diabetes and prediabetes data easy to understand and visually appealing.
Our DiabetesTV video collections provide key insights on prediabetes, preventing type 2 diabetes, and living well with diabetes.

Organize education and support activities
Once you have raised awareness of diabetes among your members, take the next important step—use education and support activities to teach them how to make healthier choices.
Education activities can include workshops, cooking demonstrations, and physical activity classes.
Program for people at risk for type 2 diabetes
The National Diabetes Prevention Program 's evidence-based lifestyle change program is designed to prevent type 2 diabetes in people with prediabetes.
Participants meet with a trained Lifestyle Coach and a small group of other people with the same goals and challenges. Sessions meet in person or online every week for 6 months and then every month for 6 months. Many organizations offer the program across the nation.
Find out how your organization can participate to benefit your members.

Create a healthy environment
You can support people who are taking steps to prevent and manage diabetes by providing healthy food and beverage options at meetings, celebrations, and other gatherings. When a healthy choice is the easy choice, everyone benefits.
The resources below will help you offer healthy food options and add physical activity to your organization's events.

Buffet Table Tips for People With Diabetes : Share these tips with your members before the next barbecue, picnic, or family reunion to help them make wise food choices.
Healthy Food Service Guidelines : Create a food environment where healthier choices are available to your members at meetings, celebrations, and other events. Healthier options at activities can help your members make healthier choices.
The CDC Guide to Strategies to Increase Physical Activity in the Community

May 14, 2024

Syndicate