===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/diabetes-testing/index.html",
  "title": "Diabetes Testing - CDC",
  "category": "blood_glucose",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 1,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-11T03:09:36.089032",
  "source_name": "cdc.gov",
  "document_title": "Diabetes Testing - CDC",
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Diabetes Testing - CDC

Diabetes Testing | Diabetes | CDC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip directly to site content 
 Skip directly to search 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 An official website of the United States government 
 
 
 
 Here's how you know
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Official websites use .gov 
 A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
 A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 Diabetes Testing 

 
 
 May 15, 2024 
 
 Español 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key points 
 
 
 
 You&rsquo;ll need a blood sugar test to find out if you have prediabetes or diabetes. 
 Testing is simple, and results are usually available quickly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Why get tested 
 Prediabetes and type 2 diabetes often don't have any symptoms . (Type 1 diabetes is different&mdash;symptoms can develop quickly and can be severe.) 
 That's why people with any risk factors are urged to ask their doctor if they should be screened. Being screened means getting tested when you don't have any symptoms. 
 Catching prediabetes early can help people prevent or delay type 2 diabetes. Finding out they have type 2 diabetes&mdash;and taking action&mdash;can help people prevent or delay serious health complications. 
 Getting tested is simple and quick. Your blood will be drawn at your doctor's office or at a clinic so your blood sugar can be tested. Results are usually available quickly. 
 Keep Reading 
 Diabetes Risk Factors 
 
 
 When to get tested 
 Prediabetes and type 2 diabetes 
 Ask your doctor about getting tested for prediabetes or type 2 diabetes if you have any of the risk factors . If you had your blood sugar tested at a health fair or pharmacy, follow up with your doctor. Your doctor may want to re-test you to make sure the results are accurate. 
 Type 1 diabetes 
 If your doctor thinks you have type 1 diabetes or you're at high risk for type 1, your blood may also be tested for autoantibodies. These substances show your body is attacking itself and are often found with type 1 diabetes but not with type 2. Autoantibody testing can detect early stages of type 1 diabetes, which can be treated before symptoms and serious complications appear. 
 You may have your urine tested for ketones. Ketones are produced when your body burns fat for energy. Having ketones in your urine indicates you have type 1 diabetes instead of type 2. 
 Gestational diabetes 
 Gestational diabetes usually develops around the 24 th week of pregnancy. You'll probably be tested between 24 and 28 weeks. 
 If you're at higher risk for gestational diabetes, your doctor may test you earlier. If your blood sugar is higher than normal early in your pregnancy, you may not have gestational diabetes. You may have type 1 or type 2 diabetes instead. 

 
 
 Types of tests 
 Tests for type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, prediabetes, and gestational diabetes 
 A1C test 
 The A1C test measures your average blood sugar level over the past 2 or 3 months. 
 
 Normal : below 5.7% 
 Prediabetes : 5.7&ndash;6.4% 
 Diabetes : 6.5% or above 
 
 Fasting blood sugar test 
 This measures your blood sugar after an overnight fast (not eating). 
 
 Normal : 99 mg/dL or below 
 Prediabetes : 100&ndash;125 mg/dL 
 Diabetes : 126 mg/dL or above 
 
 Glucose tolerance test 
 This measures your blood sugar before and after you drink a liquid that contains glucose. You'll fast (not eat) overnight before the test and have your blood drawn to measure your fasting blood sugar level. Then you'll drink the liquid and have your blood sugar level checked. These checks usually happen at 1 hour, 2 hours, and possibly 3 hours afterward. 
 At 2 hours: 
 
 Normal : 140 mg/dL or below 
 Prediabetes : 140&ndash;199 mg/dL 
 Diabetes : 200 mg/dL or above 
 
 Random blood sugar test 
 This measures your blood sugar at the time you're tested. You can take this test at any time and don't need to fast (not eat) first. 
 
 Normal : n/a 
 Prediabetes : n/a 
 Diabetes : 200 mg/dL or above 
 
 Autoantibody test 
 Type 1 diabetes is caused when your immune system creates autoantibodies (a type of immune cell) that destroy cells that make insulin in the pancreas. A simple blood test can be done to check for these diabetes-related autoantibodies. Type 1 diabetes develops in three specific stages according to how many autoantibodies are present, whether blood sugar levels are normal, and if symptoms are present. 
 Tests for gestational diabetes 
 Glucose screening test 
 This measures your blood sugar at the time you're tested. You'll drink a liquid that contains glucose. Then, 1 hour later your blood will be drawn to check your blood sugar level. A normal result is 140 mg/dL or lower. If your level is higher than 140 mg/dL, you'll need to take a glucose tolerance test. 
 Glucose tolerance test 
 This measures your blood sugar before and after you drink a liquid that contains glucose. You'll fast (not eat) overnight before the test and have your blood drawn to measure your fasting blood sugar level. Then you'll drink the liquid and have your blood sugar level checked. These checks usually happen at 1 hour, 2 hours, and possibly 3 hours afterward. 
 Results can differ depending on the size of the glucose drink and how often your blood sugar is tested. Ask your doctor what your test results mean . 

 
 
 After a diagnosis 
 If your results show you have type 1, type 2, or gestational diabetes, talk with your doctor about a detailed treatment plan. Your plan should include a referral to: 
 
 Diabetes self-management education and support services . 
 An endocrinologist (a doctor who diagnoses and treats hormone-related conditions). In its early stages, type 1 diabetes can be treated to avoid or delay symptoms and serious complications. 
 A registered dietitian. 
 
 You'll also find out about specific steps you can take to be your healthiest no matter what type of diabetes you have. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 May 15, 2024 
 

 

 
 Sources 
 Print 
 Share 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn 
 
 
 
 Twitter 
 
 
 
 Syndicate 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Content Source: 
 National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion ; Diabetes 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diabetes 
 
 
 Diabetes is a chronic disease that affects how your body turns food into energy. About 1 in 8 Americans has diabetes. 
 
 View All 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For Everyone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Basics 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 
 
 
 Testing 
 
 
 
 Risk Factors 
 
 
 
 Preventing 
 
 
 
 Treatment 
 
 
 
 Providing Care 
 
 
 
 Living with Diabetes 
 
 
 
 View all 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Health Care Providers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Guidance 
 
 
 
 DSMES for Health Care Providers 
 
 
 
 Prevent Type 2 Diabetes: Talking to Your Patients About Lifestyle Change 
 
 
 
 View All 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Public Health 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Community-based Organizations (CBOs) 
 
 
 
 Toolkits for Diabetes Educators and Community Health Workers 
 
 
 
 National Diabetes Statistics Report 
 
 
 
 View All 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sign up for Email Updates