===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/signs-symptoms/index.html",
  "title": "Diabetes Signs & Symptoms - CDC",
  "category": "diagnosis",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 1,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-11T03:09:48.893213",
  "source_name": "cdc.gov",
  "document_title": "Diabetes Signs & Symptoms - CDC",
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Diabetes Signs & Symptoms - CDC

Symptoms of Diabetes | Diabetes | CDC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip directly to site content 
 Skip directly to search 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 An official website of the United States government 
 
 
 
 Here's how you know
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Official websites use .gov 
 A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
 A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 Symptoms of Diabetes 

 
 
 May 15, 2024 
 
 Español 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key points 
 
 
 
 Type 1 and type 2 diabetes often develop slowly over time, and both can start with few or no symptoms. 
 Gestational diabetes doesn&rsquo;t usually have symptoms. Your doctor should test you for it between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy. 
 Knowing the symptoms of diabetes can help you to manage your health and prevent complications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 Both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can have similar symptoms, including: 
 
 Frequent urination (peeing). 
 Increased thirst and hunger. 
 Losing weight without trying. 
 Fatigue (tiredness). 
 Feeling irritable or moody. 
 Blurry vision. 
 Frequent urinary tract infections (UTIs) or yeast infections. 
 
 Keep Reading 
 Testing for Diabetes Symptoms of type 1 diabetes 
 People with type 1 diabetes in its early stages don&rsquo;t have any symptoms. As type 1 progresses , symptoms can appear suddenly, in just a few weeks or months, and can be severe. People with type 1 diabetes may also have these symptoms: 
 
 Nausea. 
 Vomiting. 
 Stomach pains. 
 Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). 
 
 Type 1 diabetes is frequently diagnosed in childhood, but it can develop at any age. 
 
 Did you know? 
 In children, unexplained bed-wetting or increased accidents could be a sign of type 1 diabetes. Keep an eye on any changes in bathroom habits if your child is at risk. 
 
 Keep Reading 
 Just Diagnosed With Type 1 Diabetes Symptoms of type 2 diabetes 
 Type 2 diabetes symptoms often take several years to develop. Some people don't notice any symptoms at all. Type 2 diabetes usually starts when you're an adult, though more and more children and teens are developing it. Because symptoms are hard to spot, it's important to know the risk factors for type 2 diabetes. 
 Some additional symptoms more common in type 2 diabetes include: 
 
 Cuts, sores, or wounds that are very slow to heal. 
 Dark patches of skin around the neck, armpits, or groin. 
 Numbness or tingling in the hands or feet. 
 
 Keep Reading 
 Diabetes Risk Factors Symptoms of gestational diabetes 
 Gestational diabetes (diabetes during pregnancy) usually doesn't have any symptoms. If you're pregnant, your doctor should test you for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy. If needed, you can make changes like healthy eating and being active to protect your health and your baby's health. If those changes aren&rsquo;t enough to manage your blood sugar, your doctor may prescribe medicine to help. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 May 15, 2024 
 

 

 
 Sources 
 Print 
 Share 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn 
 
 
 
 Twitter 
 
 
 
 Syndicate 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Content Source: 
 National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion ; Diabetes 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diabetes 
 
 
 Diabetes is a chronic disease that affects how your body turns food into energy. About 1 in 8 Americans has diabetes. 
 
 View All 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 For Everyone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Basics 
 
 
 
 Symptoms 
 
 
 
 Testing 
 
 
 
 Risk Factors 
 
 
 
 Preventing 
 
 
 
 Treatment 
 
 
 
 Providing Care 
 
 
 
 Living with Diabetes 
 
 
 
 View all 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Health Care Providers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Guidance 
 
 
 
 DSMES for Health Care Providers 
 
 
 
 Prevent Type 2 Diabetes: Talking to Your Patients About Lifestyle Change 
 
 
 
 View All 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Public Health 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Community-based Organizations (CBOs) 
 
 
 
 Toolkits for Diabetes Educators and Community Health Workers 
 
 
 
 National Diabetes Statistics Report 
 
 
 
 View All 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sign up for Email Updates