===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-medication/diabetes-and-victoza.html",
  "title": "Victoza - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "medication",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:12:42.039645",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Victoza - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 862,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Victoza - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Medications ACTOS Amaryl Avandia Bydureon Byetta Corticosteroids Eylea Forxiga Galvus Glucobay Glucagon injection kits Insulin Invokana Januvia Jardiance Lantus Lucentis Lyxumia Metformin Glucophage Metformin and cancer Metformin and other diabetes medication Metformin and weight loss Metformin brands Metformin during pregnancy Metformin factsheet Metformin FAQs Metformin side effects Mounjaro Onglyza Prandin Statins Semaglutide Symlin Tresiba Trulicity Victoza Classes of drugs Alpha glucosidase inhibitor Amylin analogues Biguanides DPP-4 inhibitors (gliptins) Incretin mimetics (GLP-1 analogues) Oral hypoglycemics Prandial glucose regulators (glinides) SGLT2 inhibitors Sulphonylureas Thiazolidinediones (glitazones) Fake diabetes cures Forgetting an insulin injection Forgetting to take tablets Victoza (Liraglutide) is a drug that is injected for treatment of type 2 diabetes. Join other Victoza users in the Medication Forum Victoza (liraglutide) is a GLP-1 analogue for the treatment of type 2 diabetes Approved in 2010, the diabetes drug operates with a 24-hour duration of action and is therefore taken by injection once per day. The drug displays a number of benefits such as in improving blood glucose control whilst helping with weight loss. About Victoza Trade name: Victoza Generic name: Liraglutide Drug class: GLP-1 receptor agonists (incretin mimetics) Manufacturer: Novo Nordisk How does Victoza (Liraglutide) work? Liraglutide functions over a 24-hour period to lower both fasting and post-prandial blood glucose levels, and help people with diabetes to manage their blood sugar. Liraglutide works by stimulating the secretion of insulin as well as suppressing the secretion of glucagon in a glucose-dependent manner. The drug also delays gastric (stomach) emptying, slowing down the absorption of glucose by the gut and reducing appetite. How does Victoza (Liraglutide) work? Liraglutide functions over a 24-hour period to lower both fasting and post-prandial blood glucose levels, and help people with diabetes to manage their blood sugar. Liraglutide works by stimulating the secretion of insulin as well as suppressing the secretion of glucagon in a glucose-dependent manner. The drug also delays gastric (stomach) emptying, slowing down the absorption of glucose by the gut and reducing appetite. Who can take Victoza? Victoza is prescribed for people with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes as an adjunct to diet and exercise. The dose of Victoza prescribed on the NHS is 1.2 mg, although some might be prescribed up to 1.8mg. How should I take Victoza? Victoza is injected, under the skin (subcutaneously), in areas such as the stomach (abdomen), thigh or upper arm. Victoza is injected once per day. Liraglutide should be taken at the same time each day so it is advisable to pick a time of day that will be easy to remember and convenient. Victoza can be taken in addition to other diabetes drugs such as metformin and sluphonylureas. What are the side effects of Victoza? The most common side effects associated with Victoza are: Nausea Headaches Vomiting Diarrhoea Less common side effects include loss of appetite, indigestion, acid-reflux and constipation. In liraglutide in combination with metformin, no episodes of major hypoglycaemia have been observed. Hypoglycaemia is more common when liraglutide is used in conjunction with a sulphonylurea. Is Victoza clinically proven? Some head-to-head studies have showed that Victoza can be more effective than Byetta Following a 26-week study, patients who took liraglutide experienced a greater reduction in average blood sugar levels than those who took Byetta. Furthermore, many patients preferred a once-a-day dose. Researchers have clearly stated that Victoza is an appropriate GLP-1 analogue for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Is Liraglutide a naturally occurring drug? Liraglutide is in the drug class called human-glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). GLP-1 is a hormone that is found in the gut, however, the drug itself is a chemical analogue which means that some changes to the original chemical structure have been made. Does Victoza help people with diabetes to lose weight? Victoza has been shown to help patients to achieve weight loss by increasing satiety (feeling of fullness) and delaying gastric emptying, therefore reducing intake of calories. Weight-gain is a common side-effect of type 2 diabetes treatments, and weight loss is an important goal. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Medication Retatrutide is an new drug that has shown promise in the treatment… 4 minute read