===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-medication/diabetes-and-metformin.html",
  "title": "Metformin: Uses, Dosages, Side Effects - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "medication",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:12:33.441877",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Metformin: Uses, Dosages, Side Effects - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 971,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Metformin: Uses, Dosages, Side Effects - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 19 February 2024 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Medications ACTOS Amaryl Avandia Bydureon Byetta Corticosteroids Eylea Forxiga Galvus Glucobay Glucagon injection kits Insulin Invokana Januvia Jardiance Lantus Lucentis Lyxumia Metformin Glucophage Metformin and cancer Metformin and other diabetes medication Metformin and weight loss Metformin brands Metformin during pregnancy Metformin factsheet Metformin FAQs Metformin side effects Mounjaro Onglyza Prandin Statins Semaglutide Symlin Tresiba Trulicity Victoza Classes of drugs Alpha glucosidase inhibitor Amylin analogues Biguanides DPP-4 inhibitors (gliptins) Incretin mimetics (GLP-1 analogues) Oral hypoglycemics Prandial glucose regulators (glinides) SGLT2 inhibitors Sulphonylureas Thiazolidinediones (glitazones) Fake diabetes cures Forgetting an insulin injection Forgetting to take tablets Metformin is an oral antidiabetic medication belonging to the biguanide group of drugs used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes . Click here to read our Diabetes and Metformin FAQs including information on lactic acidosis. Other names for metformin Metformin is sold both under many brand names , and also as a generic drug. Common brand names include: Glucophage Riomet Fortamet Glumetza Obimet Dianben Diabex Diaformin Metformin for diabetes Metformin contains the active ingredient metformin hydrochloride (or metformin hcl). Metformin is available both in combination with other drugs, or as a single treatment (a monotherapy). Metformin was approved in 1994 (in the USA) and is prescribed as: 500mg tablets 850mg tablets 500mg modified-release tablets 750mg modified-release tablets 1g modified-release tablets 1g oral powder sachets sugar free 500mg oral powder sachets sugar free 500mg/5ml oral solution sugar free Metformin SR Metformin is also available as metformin SR, a slow release or modified release form of the medication. Modified release versions of metformin may be prescribed for people experiencing significant gastro-intestinal intolerance as a result of standard metformin. How does metformin work? Metformin is a type 2 diabetic drug that works by inhibiting hepatic glucose production, also known as gluconeogenesis and improving insulin sensitivity. This enhances glucose uptake and utilisation by the body. Like most diabetic drugs, the ultimate goals of metformin are to lower blood sugar to a normal level and maintain this level. Metformin can be used in conjunction with other diabetic drugs, and diabetics should also use diet and exercise to help control their condition. Metformin is suitable for women who have gestational diabetes . Speak to your doctor before taking any medication. Read the Metformin factsheet Read common metformin questions How it works Metformin helps the body to control blood sugar in several ways. The drug helps type 2 diabetics respond better to their own insulin , lower the amount of sugar created by the liver, and decreasing the amount of sugar absorbed by the intestines. When taken alone, Metformin is unlikely to cause hypoglycemia or weight gain, but if it is administered alongside insulin or a sulfonylurea both of these side effects are more likely. Many research studies have demonstrated decreased cancer risk and improved mortality rates amongst people with type 2 diabetes on metformin. Side effects Like most medications, metformin can have side effects. Many people report having to diarrhoea as a result of taking the drug, which in some cases passes over time. It’s important to speak to your doctor should any side effects become painful or impinge on your daily routine. You can find a list of metformin side effects . On the forum Whether you’re currently using metformin or would like to find out more, the metformin forum is a place where members of the diabetes community can share their first-hand experiences with the drug, offering advice and support to others. Metformin and cancer benefits A number of research studies indicate that metformin may be beneficial in reducing incidence of a variety of cancers. Diabetes treatment could reduce risk of liver cancer More evidence on common diabetes drug lowering cancer risk Diabetes drug metformin could help lower breast cancer risk Metformin associated with reduced mortality rates after major surgery Metformin and COVID-19s More recently, metformin has been researched in regard to the COVID-19 pandemic. Metformin found to reduce risk of dying from COVID-19 More evidence suggest metformin could help treat COVID-19 Metformin found to reduce female death rates among those with COVID-19 Is it possible to come off metformin? By making lifestyle changes such as regularly exercising and eating healthy foods, it is possible to decrease your blood HbA1c levels, improving your type 2 diabetes to the point you no longer need to take metformin. Following the structured Low Carb Program helped Kate lose 19kg and she no longer needs metformin to help manage her diabetes. Find out how she did it, and read other diabetes success stories here . Contraindications Metformin is contraindicated in patients with severe kidney impairment, metabolic acidosis, or known hypersensitivity to metformin. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Medication Retatrutide is an new drug that has shown promise in the treatment… 4 minute read