===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/323185",
  "title": "Metformin overview",
  "category": "medication",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 3,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-27T23:15:33.969828",
  "source_name": "medicalnewstoday.com",
  "document_title": "Metformin overview",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<article>",
  "word_count": 1289,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Metformin overview

Key takeaways Early indicators of type 2 diabetes can be subtle, including frequent urination, increased thirst, and persistent hunger, which may be easily overlooked. Recognizing these early signs is crucial because early diagnosis and management through lifestyle changes and medical treatment can significantly reduce the risk of long-term complications. Various factors such as age, lifestyle, family history, and ethnicity can elevate the risk of developing type 2 diabetes, necessitating increased vigilance among those with such predispositions. Type 2 diabetes is a common health condition in the United States. It occurs when the body is unable to produce enough of the hormone insulin to function properly, or the cells in the body are no longer able to react to insulin. The onset of type 2 diabetes can be gradual, and symptoms can be mild during the early stages. As a result, many people may not realize that they have this condition. Possible early signs may include frequent urination and increased thirst. In this article, we look at the early signs and symptoms of type 2 diabetes and the importance of early diagnosis. We also discuss the risk factors for developing this condition. Early signs and symptoms The early signs and symptoms of type 2 diabetes can include: 1. Frequent urination When blood sugar levels are high, the kidneys try to remove the excess sugar by filtering it out of the blood. This can lead to a person needing to urinate more frequently , particularly at night. 2. Increased thirst The frequent urination necessary to remove excess sugar from the blood can result in the body losing additional water. Over time, this can cause dehydration and make a person feel more thirsty than usual . 3. Frequent hunger People with diabetes often do not get enough energy from their food. The digestive system breaks food down into a simple sugar called glucose, which the body uses as fuel. In people with diabetes, not enough of this glucose moves from the bloodstream into the body’s cells. As a result, people with type 2 diabetes often feel constantly hungry, regardless of how recently they have eaten. 4. Fatigue Type 2 diabetes can affect a person’s energy levels and cause them to feel fatigued. Diabetes fatigue occurs due to insufficient sugar moving from the bloodstream into the body’s cells. 5. Blurry vision An excess of sugar in the blood can damage the tiny blood vessels in the eyes, which can cause blurry vision . This can occur in one or both eyes. High blood sugar levels can also lead to swelling of the eye lens. This can cause blurred vision but will improve when blood sugar levels lessen. If a person with diabetes goes without treatment, the damage to these blood vessels can become more severe , and permanent vision loss may eventually occur. 6. Slow healing of cuts and wounds High blood sugar levels can damage the body’s nerves and blood vessels, which can impair blood circulation. As a result, even small cuts and wounds may take weeks or months to heal. Slow wound healing also increases the risk of infection. 7. Tingling, numbness, or pain in the hands or feet High blood sugar levels can affect blood circulation and damage the nerves . In people with type 2 diabetes, this can lead to pain or a sensation of tingling or numbness in the hands and feet. This condition is known as neuropathy . It can worsen over time and lead to more serious complications if a person does not get treatment for their diabetes. 8. Patches of darker skin Patches of darker skin forming on creases of the neck, armpit, or groin can also result from diabetes . These patches may feel soft and velvety. This skin condition is known as acanthosis nigricans . 9. Itching and yeast infections Excess sugar in the blood and urine provides food for yeast, which can lead to infection. Yeast infections tend to occur on warm, moist areas of the skin, such as the mouth, genital areas, and armpits. The affected areas are usually itchy, but a person may also experience burning, skin discoloration, and soreness. Early diagnosis Recognizing the early signs of type 2 diabetes can allow a person to receive a diagnosis and treatment sooner. Getting appropriate treatment, making lifestyle changes, and managing blood sugar levels can greatly improve a person’s health and quality of life and reduce the risk of complications . Without treatment, persistently high blood sugar levels can lead to severe and sometimes life threatening complications, including: heart disease stroke nerve damage, or neuropathy foot problems kidney disease, which can result in a person needing dialysis eye disease or loss of vision sexual problems Keeping blood sugar levels well managed is crucial for preventing some of these complications. The longer blood sugar levels remain unmanaged, the higher the risk of other health problems. Untreated diabetes can also lead to hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome (HHS), which causes a severe and persistent increase in blood sugar levels. An illness or infection will usually trigger HHS, which can require hospitalization. This sudden complication tends to affect older people. Risk factors for type 2 diabetes Anyone can develop type 2 diabetes, but certain factors can increase a person’s risk. These risk factors include : being age 45 years or older living a sedentary lifestyle having overweight or obesity eating an unbalanced diet having a family history of diabetes having polycystic ovary syndrome having a medical history of gestational diabetes, heart disease, or stroke having prediabetes Diabetes and ethnicity The prevalence of diabetes is different among races and ethnicities. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) reports the following rate of confirmed diabetes diagnoses in adults in different groups. Group Diabetes prevalence American Indian/Alaskan Native 13.6% non-Hispanic Black 12.1% Hispanic 11.7% Asian American 9.1% non-Hispanic white 6.9% Frequently asked questions Below are some frequently asked questions about type 2 diabetes. How does type 2 diabetes make a person feel? When a person first develops diabetes, they may feel more thirsty, hungry, or tired than usual. They may also experience blurry vision and lightheadedness. Later symptoms can cause tingling, numbness, or pain in the hands or feet. What are the three most common symptoms of undiagnosed diabetes? The most common symptoms of diabetes include increased thirst, feeling tired, weight loss, and increased urination. When does type 2 diabetes usually start? Type 2 diabetes typically develops in adults over 45 years old but is becoming more common in younger adults, teens, and children. This condition is not exclusive to people within a certain age or weight range. How do people deal with type 2 diabetes? Management for type 2 diabetes may involve regular checks with a healthcare professional who may prescribe insulin or recommend lifestyle changes, such as regular physical activity, such as exercising, a balanced diet, maintaining a moderate weight, reducing stress, and monitoring blood sugar levels. Takeaway Type 2 diabetes is a common condition that causes high blood sugar levels. Early signs and symptoms can include tiredness and hunger, frequent urination, increased thirst, vision problems, slow wound healing, and yeast infections. Anyone who experiences possible signs and symptoms of diabetes should contact a doctor for an evaluation, especially if they have other risk factors for developing this condition. Early detection and treatment of type 2 diabetes can help improve a person’s quality of life and reduce the risk of severe complications. It is important to have a support system of people who understand what it is like to have a diagnosis and live with type 2 diabetes. Bezzy T2D is a free app that supports people with type 2 diabetes through one-on-one and live group discussions. Download the app for iPhone or Android . Read the article in Spanish.