===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/insulin-resistance.html",
  "title": "Insulin resistance - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "medication",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:11:49.769370",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Insulin resistance - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 677,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Insulin resistance - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Insulin resistance is the name given to when cells of the body don’t respond properly to the hormone insulin. Insulin resistance is the driving factor that leads to type 2 diabetes , gestational diabetes and prediabetes Insulin resistance is closely associated with obesity; however, it is possible to be insulin resistant without being overweight or obese. Modern research has shown that insulin resistance can be combatted by treatment methods that reduce how much insulin the body is producing or taking via insulin injections or insulin pumps. Reducing insulin resistance can be achieved by following low-carbohydrate and ketogenic diets. What is insulin resistance? The role of insulin is to allow cells of the body to take in glucose to be used as fuel or stored as body fat. [282] It also means that glucose is more likely to build up in the blood and this can lead to too high blood sugar levels When the body becomes resistant to insulin, it tries to cope by producing more insulin. People with insulin resistance are often producing too more insulin than healthy people. Producing too much insulin is known as hyperinsulinemia Symptoms of insulin resistance Initially, insulin resistance presents no symptoms. The symptoms only start to appear once it leads to secondary effects such as higher blood sugar levels. When this happens, the symptoms may include: Lethargy (tiredness) Hunger Difficulty concentrating (brain fog) Other signs that often appear in people with insulin resistance include: Weight gain around the middle (belly fat) High blood pressure High cholesterol levels If insulin resistance develops into prediabetes or type 2 diabetes, the symptoms will include increased blood glucose levels and more of the classic symptoms of type 2 diabetes Causes of insulin resistance Whilst the exact cause of insulin resistance is still not fully understood, it is well-known which factors can lead to insulin resistance developing. Insulin resistance can commonly develop if one or more of the following factors apply: If you are overweight or obese Having a high-calorie diet, high-carbohydrate or high-sugar diet Sedentary lifestyle – taking little physical activity Taking high doses of steroids over an extended period of time Having chronic stress Having Cushing’s disease or polycystic ovary disease In terms of what is happening inside the body that causes insulin resistance, researchers have observed that insulin resistance occurs in people that have: High levels of insulin circulating in their blood Excessive fat stored in the liver and pancreas High levels of inflammation Can insulin resistance be reduced or reversed? It is certainly possible to reduce the effects of insulin resistance and there are a number of effective ways to do this. Effective methods include: Low-carbohydrate and ketogenic diets Very-low-calorie diets Weight loss surgery Taking a lot of exercise in combination with a healthy diet These methods share a similar way of working in that they all help to reduce the body’s need for insulin and help people to lose weight. Read more on reversing the effects of diabetes What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.