===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-and-cold-weather.html",
  "title": "Cold weather and diabetes management - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "lifestyle",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:10:52.638954",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Cold weather and diabetes management - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 1136,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Cold weather and diabetes management - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 18 November 2024 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Over the winter months, people of all diabetes types tend to have higher HbA1c levels than during the warmer months. With snow, ice, and frost all threatening, blood sugar levels can creep up as temperatures drop. What’s the science? Colder temperatures may trigger the release of stress hormones like cortisol and adrenaline. These hormones can raise blood glucose levels by stimulating the liver to release more glucose. The body’s natural response to cold is to conserve energy, which can also affect insulin sensitivity. With this in mind, we’ve compiled some tips to help keep your blood glucose levels under control during a cold snap. Keep testing your blood The cold weather can leave you with cold hands which can make blood testing more difficult. However, don’t let the cold put you off from doing your tests. Regular testing will help you catch any highs or lows and keep your sugar levels under control. If your hands are cold, try warming them up on a warm mug or placing them near a radiator (with a towel or thick clothing over it) before testing. Stay hydrated It’s easy to forget to drink enough water during colder months, but staying hydrated is essential for blood glucose control. Dehydration can lead to higher blood sugar levels and make it harder for your body to manage glucose. Make sure to drink plenty of fluids, even if you don’t feel thirsty, and keep an eye on signs of dehydration like dry lips or feeling unusually tired. Keep your activity levels up Even just a little physical activity each day can help your glucose levels in several important ways: Increasing insulin sensitivity Keeping you warm Good for the mind Exercise increases insulin sensitivity, allowing your body to use insulin more effectively to regulate sugar levels. If you use insulin, be mindful that your insulin needs may decrease with physical activity, so keep a watchful eye on your blood sugar levels. Remember that physical activity can affect your glucose levels for up to 48 hours after you exercise. Exercise also helps keep you warm. While you may cool down immediately after stopping, the longer-term effect of exercise is to boost your metabolism , which helps maintain body temperature. If you often feel cold during the winter, adding more activity to your day could be beneficial. Finally, exercise is excellent for your mental health. The saying “healthy body, healthy mind” holds true, especially in winter. Staying active will help keep your mind fresh, allowing you to better manage the daily challenges of living with diabetes. If the cold outside makes outdoor exercise unappealing, try getting creative indoors. Dancing, jumping, indoor aerobics, yoga , tai chi, or even climbing stairs can keep you active. Games on consoles like the Nintendo Wii or Xbox Kinect can be fun ways to stay moving in the warmth of your home. Consider vitamin D and its impact With limited sunlight exposure in the winter, many people experience lower levels of vitamin D, which can affect both mood and insulin sensitivity. Vitamin D plays a role in the body’s ability to manage glucose. Consider speaking to your healthcare provider about taking a vitamin D supplement if you think you may be deficient. Keep an eye on your diet Colder weather can impact your diet in several ways. People often eat more during the winter, opting for ‘comfort foods,’ and chilly weather may tempt you to order takeaways instead of cooking. Your body may crave more calories to stay warm, which is a natural response, but be mindful not to overeat and stick to nutritious foods. This is particularly true during periods like Diwali , Christmas and New Year. Home cooked meals, whole grains, modest portions of fruit, nuts, and vegetables are great choices. Ready meals, takeaways, and snacks may provide short-term satisfaction but often leave you hungry again within a few hours. Shopping for fresh ingredients can be a chance to add some extra physical activity to your day – just wrap up warm and wear gloves to protect your hands. Keep illness at bay Becoming ill makes diabetes harder to control. Illness causes physical stress, and stress hormones can raise your blood sugar levels. When you’re ill, you may also feel fatigued and less capable of managing your condition. To reduce the risk of catching a virus, prioritise staying warm, eating healthily, and keeping an eye on your sugar levels for any trends. Also, to guard against catching influenza , book yourself in for a flu jab. The NHS will generally provide these for free to all diabetics. Keep depression out in the cold Winter can take a toll on your mood. Cold, dark weather, less sunlight, and financial stress during the holidays can lead to feelings of depression . Following the tips above can put you in a better position to manage the winter blues. If the season still feels tough despite your best efforts, don’t hesitate to reach out to others. Talking to family and friends can improve your mood. Additionally, connecting with people who understand diabetes can be incredibly helpful. The Diabetes Forum is always a supportive space to share experiences, get advice, or even have a laugh with others. Take winter safety precautions If you have diabetic neuropathy or reduced sensation in your extremities, take extra care to protect yourself from frostbite or injuries. Wear appropriate clothing, such as thermal socks and insulated boots, to keep your feet warm and safe from the cold. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Living with Diabetes As the days grow shorter and darker in autumn and winter, many… 3 minute read Living with Diabetes Overeating is common, harms glucose control and it is fixable with straight… 6 minute read