===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/Diabetes-and-Weight-Loss.html",
  "title": "Weight loss - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "lifestyle",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:11:15.244341",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Weight loss - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 734,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Weight loss - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 08 September 2022 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Mike Watts Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail Type 2 diabetes is very closely associated with weight, with over 90% of newly diagnosed type 2 diabetics above their ideal weight. Being overweight can hurt your confidence, and getting back to a healthy weight can seem like a never-ending challenge. Losing some weight could both prevent you from developing diabetes, or help you to better manage your condition if you have already been diagnosed with diabetes. First things first – weigh yourself First off, work out how overweight you actually are. For many people, weighing yourself is the first step to weighing less. Most people will have an intuitive sense of what a healthy weight is for them, but understanding how much you have to lose can make all the difference in having clear goals. Talking about weight loss can be tough, particularly if you do not know your doctor or diabetes specialist very well, but understanding weight loss can make all the difference. How overweight am I? Get ready to lose weight and keep motivated Getting into the right frame of mind to lose weight can be half the battle for some people. Get your head in good shape and allow the body to follow. Weight loss motivation What can you do? Read up as much as you can, including topics such as diabetes and obesity , and diabetes and metabolic syndrome That way you will understand your risks and what you have to do. Diabetes prevention starts with losing weight. First things first, discuss weight loss and an individual program with your health care team. Take things slowly at first, and take one step at a time. Which diet will help me to lose weight? The diet industry is huge, but how do you pick a sensible diet? Many diets involve reducing or restricting certain foods which makes some diets more or less appropriate for certain types of people. If you need help choosing which diet to pick, a dietitian will be able to assist you in making a suitable choice. Diet and weight loss How does exercise help diabetes and weight loss? Exercise can help you to lose weight, by building muscle and burning calories. Although this can take time, particularly to physically notice the differences, each activity becomes easier as you become fitter. Always make sure exercise is appropriate to your situation. Weight loss and exercise Could alternative weight loss therapies help? Alternative weight loss therapies can be beneficial to help support weight loss. They can help with motivation and can also help you to make appropriate health choices. If in any doubt though, check with your healthcare team whether the therapy is suitable for you. Alternative weight loss therapies Should I consider weight loss surgery? If all else fails, and only if all else fails, weight loss surgery is available as a last resort option. Weight loss surgery is a serious undertaking but for some people it can be particularly beneficial. Weight loss surgery Support to help you shed the weight Losing weight using physical exercise and diet control can be difficult, but if you persevere it will have a hugely positive effect for the vast majority of diabetics. Discuss losing weight on the Diabetes Forum What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs. You May Also Like Weight Overweight and obesity are serious public health concerns that are closely tied… 5 minute read