===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/317718",
  "title": "Diabetes and cardiovascular disease",
  "category": "complication/cardiovascular",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 3,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-27T23:16:14.890860",
  "source_name": "medicalnewstoday.com",
  "document_title": "Diabetes and cardiovascular disease",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<article>",
  "word_count": 1134,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Diabetes and cardiovascular disease

A diabetes diet plan can include most foods, but people may wish to limit or avoid certain foods that contribute to high blood sugar. Diabetes interferes with the ability to process blood sugar, also known as blood glucose. Around 11% of people in the United States have type 1 or type 2 diabetes, and 35% of adults have prediabetes . Eating a nutritious, balanced diet can help people manage diabetes and reduce the risk of complications. Foods provide varying amounts of the main macronutrients that give us energy: carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. There are more and less healthy types of each of these foods. This article discusses foods and drinks a person with diabetes may wish to limit or avoid. Carbohydrates Carbohydrates are an important source of energy. This macronutrient also has the most influence on a person’s blood sugar, or blood glucose. There are three main types of carbohydrates in food: starch, sugar, and fiber. Starches and sugars pose the biggest problems for people with diabetes because the body breaks these down into glucose. Refined carbs Refined carbs , or refined starches, are broken down through processing before they reach our plates. As a result of this processing, the body absorbs the carbs quickly and converts them into glucose. This increases blood sugar, so a person may feel hungry again soon after a meal. For people with diabetes or a risk of the condition, some examples of refined carbs to limit include : white rice white bread white pasta cereals with added sugars some crackers many baked goods Sugars Sugary foods mostly contain sugar and low-quality carbohydrates. They often have little or no nutritional value and can cause sharp spikes in blood glucose . Too much sugar can also contribute to weight gain and the risk of heart disease and stroke. Sugary foods to limit with diabetes include: baked goods, such as doughnuts, croissants, cakes, and cookies, and pizza dough many sauces and condiments agave nectar and other sweeteners maple syrup and other syrups candy bars premade fruit-flavored yogurts Many premade items in grocery stores contain added sugar, and this may not be obvious on their ingredients labels. Nutrition labels may refer to added sugar as fruit juice concentrate, molasses, honey, syrup, fructose, or dextrose, for example. For this reason, it is a good idea to avoid packaged or processed foods with unfamiliar ingredients and to select items that are as whole and unprocessed as possible. People with diabetes should take care when consuming dried fruit and premade juices, as these often contain added sugar. Artificial sweeteners are low in calories, but research shows that they still have a negative effect on blood sugar by increasing insulin resistance . More studies are necessary to determine the extent of this effect. » Learn more: Healthy high carb foods Protein Protein helps the body build, maintain, and replace its tissue. Every cell, tissue, and organ contains protein. For people with diabetes, choosing the best sources of protein largely depends on how much fat and carbohydrates these foods contain. When protein-rich foods are also high in saturated fat, they can contribute to high cholesterol and increase the risk of cardiovascular disease. The American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends that people limit their intake of red and processed meat as it may be high in saturated fat and sodium. It is best to choose leaner cuts that are minimally processed. Also, people with diabetes should consider avoiding or limiting the intake of: breaded, fried, and high-sodium meats processed meats, such as bacon, hot dogs, and deli meats ribs and other fatty cuts of meat poultry with the skin on deep-fried fish and seafood » Learn more: High protein foods Fats Fat is a source of essential fatty acids, such as omega-3s , and an integral part of a healthy, balanced diet. Fat also helps the body absorb vitamins A, D, E, and K. However, some fats are more nutritious than others. There are two categories of fats: saturated and unsaturated. Food nutrition labels often state how much of each fat a food contains. Saturated fat exists in animal products, oils, and processed foods. According to the ADA , these foods often contain dietary cholesterol, which can increase blood cholesterol levels. For this reason, they recommend that people consume less than 10% of their daily calories from saturated fat. People may wish to limit foods with high saturated fat contents, including: butter lard certain oils, such as palm oil cream-based dressings and dips full-fat mayonnaise french fries breaded and battered foods potato chips many premade meals burgers most fast foods many salad dressings The ADA recommends focusing instead on monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats. These can reduce levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, or “bad” cholesterol. They can also reduce the risk of heart disease and stroke. In addition, a diet high in these fats, such as the Mediterranean diet , may have a positive effect on how the body metabolizes glucose. » Learn more: Can fat be good for you? Drinks, including alcohol It is also important for people with diabetes or prediabetes to be mindful of what they drink. Many soft drinks and juices contain carbohydrates and added sugars. Alcoholic drinks can also contain sugar and carbs, and can impair how insulin works. People should limit their consumption of alcoholic beverages, especially: beer drinks that contain fruit dessert wines drinks with a sweet mixer Anyone who does drink alcohol should do so moderately. This means having no more than a 5-ounce (oz) glass of wine, a 12-oz glass of beer, or 1.5 oz of an 80-proof spirit. The World Health Organization states that there is no safe limit of alcohol, and even a small amount can increase a person’s health risks. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) suggests that people who do not currently drink should avoid starting. » Learn more: Does alcohol affect blood sugar levels in diabetes? If you’re looking to connect with other people with type 2 diabetes, Healthline’s Bezzy T2D offers an online safe space for community, peer, and expert guidance and support. Summary There is no single diet or eating pattern that is recommended for diabetes. People’s bodies respond differently to foods, and the key to healthy eating is to find a balance that works for an individual. It is best to limit the intake of sugary foods, refined carbs, saturated fats, and alcohol, but people can include small amounts in a nutritious, balanced diet. A diabetes educator or registered dietitian can help a person develop a healthy eating plan that works for them. They base their recommendations on factors such as a person’s weight, how active they are, their treatment plan, and blood glucose targets. » FIND CARE: Search for a dietitian in your area. Read this article in Spanish .