===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.healthline.com/health/type-2-diabetes/hypertension",
  "title": "Hypertension and diabetes",
  "category": "complication/cardiovascular",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 3,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-06-27T23:16:18.478355",
  "source_name": "healthline.com",
  "document_title": "Hypertension and diabetes",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<article>",
  "word_count": 688,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Hypertension and diabetes

People with type 2 diabetes have a higher risk of developing high blood pressure. The exact link is unknown, but it’s thought to result from the two conditions having similar causes and risk factors. High blood pressure, or hypertension, is a condition that is often seen in people with type 2 diabetes. It’s unknown why there’s such a significant relationship between the two diseases. It’s believed that the following factors contribute to both conditions: obesity a diet high in fat and sodium chronic inflammation inactivity People with both type 2 diabetes and high blood pressure may find that each condition can worsen the other. Learn more about the risk factors of both conditions and how you can manage them. Risk factors for high blood pressure with diabetes The combination of high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes can significantly raise your risk of having a heart attack or stroke . There’s also evidence to show that chronic high blood pressure can speed up conditions associated with aging, such as Alzheimer’s disease and dementia . According to the National Institute of Ageing , blood vessels in the brain are particularly susceptible to damage due to high blood pressure. This makes it a major risk factor for dementia . Unmanaged diabetes isn’t the only health factor that increases the risk for high blood pressure. Your chances of having a heart attack or stroke increase significantly if you have any of the following risk factors : family history of heart disease smoking high cholesterol obesity chronic kidney disease Preventing high blood pressure with diabetes There are many lifestyle measures that can help lower your blood pressure, such as daily exercise and having a healthy diet. Exercise It’s recommended to do 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous exercise each week. In addition to lowering blood pressure, physical activity can strengthen the heart muscle and help you gain better control of your blood sugar levels. It can be beneficial to work with a doctor to develop an exercise plan. This is especially important if you: haven’t exercised before are trying to work up to something more strenuous are having trouble meeting your goals Try starting with five minutes of brisk walking each day and increase it over time. Take the stairs instead of the elevator, or park your car farther from the store entrance. Dietary changes If you have diabetes and high blood pressure, it is also important to consume foods that are heart-healthy . A healthcare professional can help you create a meal plan that works for you and considers : your dietary requirements foods you like to eat your budget the time you have to prepare your meals Remember, a healthy diet can look different for everyone. An effective eating plan is one that works for you and takes into account your personal preferences. When managing diabetes and high blood pressure, an eating plan can include: dairy or plant-based dairy products, such as milk and cheese fruits, such as apples, grapefruit, and watermelon nonstarchy vegetables, such as carrots, mushrooms, and okra protein foods, such as meat poultry fish eggs nuts and nut butters whole grains, such as brown rice and oats Treating high blood pressure with diabetes While some people can improve their type 2 diabetes and high blood pressure with lifestyle measures, most require medication . Depending on their overall health, some people may need more than one medication to help manage their blood pressure. Most high blood pressure medications fall into one of these categories : angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) beta-blockers calcium channel blockers diuretics Learn more about the medication options available for treating high blood pressure with diabetes. Takeaway People with type 2 diabetes have a higher risk of developing high blood pressure. The exact link is unknown, but it is thought to result from the two conditions having similar causes and risk factors. People with both type 2 diabetes and high blood pressure may find that each condition can worsen the other. There are many lifestyle measures that can manage both conditions, such as daily exercise and having a healthy diet.