Preventing Type 2 Diabetes
May 15, 2024
Español
Key points
Prediabetes is a serious health condition, and more than 2 in 5 U.S. adults have it.
With early action, you can reverse prediabetes to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes.
Find out if you have a high risk for prediabetes by taking the 1-minute risk test.
What is prediabetes?
Before developing type 2 diabetes, most people have prediabetes. This is when their blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough yet for a type 2 diabetes diagnosis. In the United States, about 115 million adults have prediabetes; that's more than 2 in 5.
There are usually no signs when you have prediabetes, which is why 8 in 10 people don't know they have it. You can have prediabetes for years and not know.
Ready to find out where you stand?
Take the
1-minute prediabetes risk test
If your score shows you have a high risk of prediabetes, visit your doctor for a simple blood test to confirm your result.
You can reverse prediabetes
You can reverse prediabetes to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes with proven, achievable lifestyle changes—such as losing a small amount of weight, making healthy eating choices, and getting more physically active.
Keep Reading
The Surprising Truth About Prediabetes
Risk factors
Anyone can develop prediabetes at any age, but you may have a higher risk if you:
Have a family history of type 2 diabetes.
Are over age 45.
Have overweight or obesity.
Had gestational diabetes (diabetes when pregnant).
Have high blood pressure.
Are a Hispanic/Latino, Black, Asian American, or Native American person.
Join the lifestyle change program
If your doctor confirms you have prediabetes, join the CDC-recognized National Diabetes Prevention Program (National DPP) lifestyle change program. You'll learn how to make lasting lifestyle changes to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes:
Work with a trained Lifestyle Coach, who will help you take small, manageable steps that fit into your life.
Discover how to eat healthy and add more physical activity into your day.
Find out how to manage stress, stay motivated, and solve problems to maintain your progress.
Ready to get started?
Find a lifestyle change program
near you or online.
May 15, 2024
Sources
Print
Share
Content Source:
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
Diabetes