Symptoms of Diabetes
May 15, 2024
Español
Key points
Type 1 and type 2 diabetes often develop slowly over time, and both can start with few or no symptoms.
Gestational diabetes doesn’t usually have symptoms. Your doctor should test you for it between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy.
Knowing the symptoms of diabetes can help you to manage your health and prevent complications.
Symptoms
Both type 1 and type 2 diabetes can have similar symptoms, including:
Frequent urination (peeing).
Increased thirst and hunger.
Losing weight without trying.
Fatigue (tiredness).
Feeling irritable or moody.
Blurry vision.
Frequent urinary tract infections (UTIs) or yeast infections.
Keep Reading
Testing for Diabetes
Symptoms of type 1 diabetes
People with type 1 diabetes in its early stages don’t have any symptoms. As
type 1 progresses
, symptoms can appear suddenly, in just a few weeks or months, and can be severe. People with type 1 diabetes may also have these symptoms:
Nausea.
Vomiting.
Stomach pains.
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
Type 1 diabetes is frequently diagnosed in childhood, but it can develop at any age.
Did you know?
In children, unexplained bed-wetting or increased accidents could be a sign of type 1 diabetes. Keep an eye on any changes in bathroom habits if your child is at risk.
Keep Reading
Just Diagnosed With Type 1 Diabetes
Symptoms of type 2 diabetes
Type 2 diabetes
symptoms often take several years to develop. Some people don't notice any symptoms at all. Type 2 diabetes usually starts when you're an adult, though more and more
children and teens
are developing it. Because symptoms are hard to spot, it's important to know the risk factors for type 2 diabetes.
Some additional symptoms more common in type 2 diabetes include:
Cuts, sores, or wounds that are very slow to heal.
Dark patches of skin around the neck, armpits, or groin.
Numbness or tingling in the hands or feet.
Keep Reading
Diabetes Risk Factors
Symptoms of gestational diabetes
Gestational diabetes
(diabetes during pregnancy) usually doesn't have any symptoms. If you're pregnant, your doctor should test you for gestational diabetes between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy. If needed, you can make changes like healthy eating and being active to protect your health and your baby's health. If those changes aren’t enough to manage your blood sugar, your doctor may prescribe medicine to help.
May 15, 2024
Sources
Print
Share
Content Source:
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
Diabetes