May 15, 2024
Clinical Guidance for Diabetes
Key points
Health care providers play a crucial role in helping patients prevent or delay type 2 diabetes and manage all types of diabetes.
They are often the first line in screening and referring patients to a type 2 diabetes prevention program or diabetes self-management education and support services.
Preventing type 2 diabetes
About 1 in 3 American adults has prediabetes, which increases their risk for developing type 2 diabetes. More than 8 in 10 of them don’t know they have prediabetes.
National Diabetes Prevention Program
As a health care provider, you're often the first line in screening and referring patients to a type 2 diabetes prevention program.
Refer your patients with prediabetes to the CDC-led
National Diabetes Prevention Program
(National DPP) lifestyle change program. Research shows that the program can cut the risk of type 2 diabetes by more than half.
This yearlong program, delivered by a trained Lifestyle Coach, will teach your patients how to eat healthy, increase physical activity, manage stress, and stay motivated. They can also lower their risk of a heart attack or stroke and improve their overall health.
Keep Reading:
Talking to Patients about CDC-Recognized Lifestyle Change Program
Already delivering the lifestyle change program?‎
Find resources and support.
National DPP Customer Service Center
Managing diabetes
Diabetes Standards of Care
Stay up to date on the latest
Diabetes Standards of Care
to ensure your patients are receiving timely, equitable, and high-quality care. These guidelines include screenings and management for diabetes and related complications, such as cardiovascular disease and chronic kidney disease.
Team care
Your patients manage their diabetes care with regular guidance and support from their health care team. At every health care visit, you and other care team members can encourage them to take the steps needed to manage their diabetes effectively:
Promoting Ear Health for People With Diabetes
Promoting Eye Health for People With Diabetes
Promoting Foot Health for People With Diabetes
Promoting Medication Management for People With Diabetes
Promoting Oral Health for People With Diabetes
As a health care provider, you know firsthand that these actions are key to preventing complications and enhancing quality of life for people with diabetes. Living successfully with diabetes means developing the skills to self-manage outside the clinical setting.
Diabetes self-management education and support (DSMES)
helps people learn practical skills and personalized strategies to manage diabetes in their everyday life. DSMES provides structured support so people with diabetes can make sustainable lifestyle changes with the help of a diabetes care and education specialist. People who participate in DSMES are more likely to have better health outcomes, including lower A1C levels and fewer complications.
Diabetes education helps you and your patients‎
DSMES improves your patients' diabetes management skills and health outcomes. But less than 7% of patients participate within the first year of diagnosis. Health care providers like you are the best way to increase access to DSMES.
DSMES for Health Care Providers
Resources
The Role of Community Health Workers in Addressing Food and Nutrition Security and Social Support During the COVID-19 Pandemic
. This white paper focuses on CHW efforts in social support and food and nutrition security.
Download infographic in English
en Español
The American Medical Association (AMA) can help you prevent type 2 diabetes
AMA's
Diabetes Prevention Toolkit
Consensus report on the benefits of DSMES
for adults with type 2 diabetes
Guiding Principles for the Care of People With or at Risk for Diabetes
Find a DSMES program through the
Association of Diabetes Care & Education Specialists
DSMES Toolkit
is a comprehensive collection of tools and guides for promoting, implementing, and supporting DSMES.
May 15, 2024
Sources
Print
Share
Content Source:
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
Diabetes