Type 2 Diabetes
May 15, 2024
Español
Key points
About 1 in 8 Americans has diabetes; most have type 2.
More children, teens, and young adults are developing type 2 diabetes than in the past.
Type 2 diabetes can be prevented or delayed with lifestyle changes.
Overview
More than 40 million Americans have diabetes (about 1 in 8), and about 90% to 95% of them have type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes most often develops in people 45 or older, but more and more
children, teens
, and young adults are also developing it.
Symptoms
Type 2 diabetes
symptoms
often develop over several years and can go on for a long time without being noticed. Sometimes there aren't any noticeable symptoms at all.
Risk factors
You're at risk for type 2 diabetes if you:
Have prediabetes.
Have overweight.
Are 45 or older.
Have a parent, brother, or sister with type 2 diabetes.
Are physically active less than 3 times a week.
Have ever had gestational diabetes (diabetes during pregnancy) or given birth to a baby who weighed 9 pounds or more.
Are an African American, Hispanic or Latino, American Indian, or Alaska Native person. Some Pacific Islander people and Asian American people are also at higher risk.
If you have non-alcoholic fatty liver disease you may also be at risk for type 2 diabetes.
You can prevent or delay type 2 diabetes with proven lifestyle changes. These include losing weight if you have overweight,
eating a healthy diet
, and getting regular
physical activity
Keep Reading
Preventing Type 2 Diabetes in Kids
Causes
Insulin is a hormone made by your pancreas. It acts like a key to let blood sugar into cells in your body for use as energy. If you have type 2 diabetes, cells don't respond normally to insulin. This is called
insulin resistance
Your pancreas makes more insulin to try to get cells to respond. Over time your pancreas can't keep up, and your blood sugar rises, setting the stage for
prediabetes
and type 2 diabetes.
High blood sugar is damaging to the body. It can cause other serious health problems, such as
heart disease
vision loss
, and
kidney disease
Keep Reading
Prediabetes – Your Chance to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes
Testing
simple blood test
will let you know if you have diabetes. If you've gotten your blood sugar tested at a health fair or pharmacy, follow up at a clinic or doctor's office to make sure the results are accurate.
Managing diabetes
Diabetes is managed mostly by you, with support from your health care team, family, and other important people in your life. Managing diabetes can be challenging, but everything you do to improve your health is worth it!
You may be able to
manage your diabetes
with healthy eating and being active. Or your doctor may prescribe insulin or other diabetes medicines to help manage your blood sugar and avoid
complications
. You'll still need to eat healthy and be active if you take insulin or other medicines.
Ask your doctor how often to
check your blood sugar
and what your target blood sugar levels should be. Keeping your blood sugar levels close to target will help you prevent or delay diabetes complications.
Stress is a part of life, but it can make managing diabetes harder. Regular physical activity, getting enough sleep, and relaxation exercises can help. Talk to your doctor and diabetes educator about these and other ways you can manage stress.
Make regular appointments with your health care team to be sure you're on track with your treatment plan. You can also find out about new ideas and strategies if needed.
Whether you were just diagnosed or have had diabetes for some time, meeting with a diabetes educator for support and guidance is a great idea.
May 15, 2024
Sources
Print
Share
Content Source:
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
Diabetes