Type 2 diabetes in adults: management
NICE guideline
Reference number:
NG28
Published:
02 December 2015
Last updated:
18 February 2026
Download guidance (PDF)
Terms used in this guideline
This section defines terms that have been used in a particular way for this guideline. For other definitions, see the
NICE glossary
and the
Think Local, Act Personal Care and Support Jargon Buster
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
Cardiovascular disease caused by a hardening of arteries by a buildup of fats, cholesterol and other substances. This is called atherosclerosis. This set of conditions is also known as atherosclerosis. It includes:
coronary artery disease such as myocardial infarction and unstable angina
cerebrovascular disease such as transient ischaemic attack and ischaemic stroke
peripheral arterial disease.
Continuous glucose monitoring
This covers both real-time continuous glucose monitoring (rtCGM) and intermittently scanned continuous glucose monitoring (isCGM, commonly referred to as 'flash').
A continuous glucose monitor is a device that measures blood glucose levels and sends the readings to a display device or smartphone.
Early onset type 2 diabetes
Diabetes that has been diagnosed before the age of 40.
Multiple daily injections
Two or more daily insulin injections, which could either be a basal-bolus regimen or more than one daily insulin injection.
No relevant comorbidity
People with no relevant comorbidities are people with none of the comorbidities covered in the guideline, that is, people who do not have heart failure, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, obesity, chronic kidney disease, or frailty that puts them at risk of adverse events from certain medicines.
Periodontitis
A chronic inflammatory gum disease that destroys the supporting tissues of the teeth (the periodontium).
Gingivitis is a milder form of periodontal disease than periodontitis. However, gingivitis still causes inflammation in the gum, and if not treated it can lead to periodontitis.
Recurrent hypoglycaemia
Frequent events of hypoglycaemia that occur each week or month and have an impact on quality of life.
Severe hypoglycaemia
Episodes of hypoglycaemia that require assistance from another person to treat.
Maximum tolerated dose
The highest dose of the medicine someone can take to experience positive effects without experiencing adverse effects.
Very low carbohydrate and ketogenic diets
A very low carbohydrate diet has 20 to 50 grams per day of carbohydrate or less than 10% of a 2,000 kcal/day diet. A ketogenic diet is a very low carbohydrate, high fat diet that is designed to induce ketosis.