===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/diabetes-and-pregnancy.html",
  "title": "Pregnancy and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "complication/pregnancy",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:13:41.179634",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Pregnancy and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 720,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Pregnancy and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Conor Seery Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Mail It is estimated that between 2% and 3% percent of pregnant women are affected by gestational diabetes during pregnancy. If the mother’s body cannot produce sufficient insulin to overcome this, diabetes in pregnancy can develop. Genetics and pregnancy Genetics is a prominent factor as to whether your child will develop diabetes, with the risk heightened if the newborn’s parents or siblings have diabetes. The risk percentages vary between type 1 and type 2 diabetes and are also dependent on which parent has diabetes. Read more about genetics and diabetes Pregnancy and Diabetes Blood Sugar Levels Diabetes During Pregnancy Preparing for Pregnancy Diabetes and Breastfeeding Post-Pregnancy Care HbA1c and Pregnancy Type 1 diabetes and pregnancy People with type 1 diabetes should aim to achieve tight control of their diabetes prior to and throughout their pregnancy. To help you to meet the target level of diabetes control, you may be put onto an insulin pump, if you are not on one already, and your health team should provide plenty of support. Type 2 diabetes and pregnancy Pregnancy typically places higher demands for insulin than normal and therefore it is quite common for people with type 2 diabetes to be put onto insulin during their pregnancy. Whether you are put onto insulin or not, you should receive plenty of help from your health team to ensure your diabetes is well controlled through your pregnancy. Gestational diabetes and pregnancy Gestational diabetes is a form of diabetes that develops during pregnancy if the body cannot fully cope with the additional insulin demands of both the mother and baby. The first line of treatment for gestational diabetes is through diet and exercise, however, diabetes tablets and insulin may be needed if blood glucose levels remain high. Read more about the symptoms, risk factors and treatment for gestational diabetes Target blood glucose levels before and during pregnancy The target HbA1c (a measure of long term diabetic control) for people with diabetes prior to and during pregnancy is 6.1% (or 43 mmol/mol). [91] Risks for your baby from diabetes during pregnancy The following risks are more common as a result of diabetes: Abnormal development, particularly with the baby’s heart Heart and breathing problems shortly after birth Stillbirth or death shortly after the birth Developing diabetes later in life These risks can be reduced with good diabetes control. Risks for a mother from diabetes in pregnancy Raised blood sugar levels during pregnancy increases your chances of having a larger baby, which could mean the need to have an induced labour or a caesarean section delivery. The chances of suffering a miscarriage are also higher with diabetes. Similarly to the risks for your baby, the risks for you can also be reduced with well controlled diabetes. Diabetes and preconception care If you have diabetes prior to being pregnant, it is highly recommended to prepare for your pregnancy by ensuring you receive preconception care. Make an appointment to discuss the best preparation for your pregnancy. Blood glucose control during pregnancy Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar levels) and hyperglycemia (high blood sugar levels) are both likely to happen during pregnancy. Keeping your blood sugar levels well managed is essential to reduce the chances of complications developing for you or your baby. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.