===METADATA===
{
  "url": "https://www.diabetes.co.uk/pregnancy-complications/fertility-and-diabetes.html",
  "title": "Fertility and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "category": "complication/pregnancy",
  "language": "en",
  "source_priority": 2,
  "source_type": "web_article",
  "crawled_at": "2026-07-03T10:13:38.358695",
  "source_name": "diabetes.co.uk",
  "document_title": "Fertility and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk",
  "fetch_method": "requests",
  "extraction_method": "<main>",
  "word_count": 902,
  "verified_by_doctor": false
}
===CONTENT===
Fertility and diabetes - Diabetes.co.uk

Up next Published on 15 January 2019 Updated on 29 October 2023 Author Editor Share article Facebook Twitter Pinterest Reddit Whatsapp Messenger Mail Infertility is defined as being unable to conceive following a year of regular unprotected sexual intercourse The NHS states that amongst the population as a whole, around 1 in 7 couples experience difficulty conceiving within the first year. As diabetes can lead to additional problems that may affect fertility, the risk of infertility is therefore likely to be higher for couples in which one or more partner has diabetes. Infertility can usually be treated but bear in mind that treatment on the NHS may vary depending on the cause and by funding available in your area. Diagnosing infertility If the cause of infertility can be identified, there is a better chance of being able to treat the problem. Infertility can affect both partners so it is best if you visit the doctor as a couple. As there are many conditions and factors that can affect fertility, your GP will ask you a number of questions to determine what the problem may be and whether specific tests should be run. Tests for women may include: Blood tests to test for hormone levels Ultrasound scans Swab tests for presence of chlamidya Tests for men may include: A physical examination to check for abnormalities in the penis or testicles Semen analysis A urine sample to test for chlamidya Chlamdiya is the most common sexually transmitted infection and can affect fertility. Types of infertility infertility may be categorised as primary infertility, if infertility occurs before a child is bor, or as secondary infertility if trouble conceiving occurs after a previous pregnancy. Causes of infertility that can affect both men and women The following reasons can affect the chances of conceiving in both men and women: Obesity Stress Exposure to toxic chemicals Smoking Sexually transmitted infection Certain medications may affect fertility. Chemotherapy can affect both male and female infertility as can taking the recreational drugs marijuana and cocaine Common causes of infertility in women The most common causes of infertility in women are conditions that cause problems in releasing of an ovum (egg). This can happen for a number of reasons including having PCOS , thyroid disease and premature ovarian failure. Other common problems affecting fertility include blocked or damaged fallopian tubes, pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), poor egg quality and endometriosis. Women who have diabetes are likely to experience irregular or absent periods and premature ovarian failure. The presence of diabetes complications is also known to significantly reduce fertility rates. Read more about the effects of diabetes on female fertility Common causes of infertility in men The most common cause of infertility in men is related to poor quality of semen such as having a low sperm count, having decreased sperm motility (sperm that doesn’t move properly towards the egg) or abnormally shaped sperm. Varicoceles, caused by enlarged veins within the scrotum, is another common cause of infertility in men. There are also a number of conditions that are more common in men with diabetes that can decrease or impair fertility. These conditions include: Erectile dysfunction – difficulty in achieving or maintaining an erection Hypogonadism – having low testosterone levels Retarded ejaculation – impaired ability to ejaculate Retrograde ejaculation – a problem which prevents sperm exiting out of the penis Read more about the effects of diabetes on male fertility Treatment Treatment for infertility will depend upon the cause. A number of common causes can be treated. For example, metformin can help to treat PCOS and surgery can help with treating problems cause by pelvic inflammatory disease or endometriosis. In men, a number of treatments are available for erectile dysfunction and ejaculation disorders can also be treated. If the cause cannot be identified or adequately treated, you may be eligible for assisted conception on the NHS. Assisted conception treatments include in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) and intrauterine insemination (IUI). Eligibility for fertility treatment on the NHS may vary across different parts of the country. If you are not eligible for NHS treatment, you may wish to consider private treatment. Prevention In terms of the fertility problems attributable to diabetes, these risks can be reduced through good control of blood glucose levels and through maintaining a healthy body weight. Some problems with fertility can be attributed to stress so its advisable to take measures that will reduce the amount of stress you or your partner are under. What's new on the forum? ⭐️ Yet another spiral into depression Emotional and Mental Health Maggie75 109 6 What have you eaten today? (Low carb forum) Low-carb Diet Forum Administrator 10084.44k 67.52k ‘Stop Eating After 7pm’ Challenge Type 2 Diabetes MissMuffett 269.78k 1.73k Third party apps for Freestyle Libre Ask A Question Antje77 429 19 Type 2s: What was your fasting blood glucose in a morning? (very low chat level) Type 2 Diabetes equipoise 8119.42k 82.39k MedM Health App display problem Ask A Question CatsFive 47 0 What was your fasting blood glucose? (with some chat) Diabetes Discussions NewdestinyX 8705.93k 84.85k Hi I’m julieclarke I’ve joined to find out more about T2 diabetes Diabetes Discussions lovinglife 70.44k 1.06k BGM - what model? Ask A Question CatsFive 477 17 Fasting Blood Sugar this morning + yesterday's food AND physical activity Type 2 Diabetes AGC_68 582.60k 6.12k Get our free newsletters Stay up to date with the latest news, research and breakthroughs.